--- PAGE 1 ---
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 1174 : 2025 INSC 263
Gopal Singh & Anr. 
v. 
State of Uttarakhand
(Criminal Appeal No. 1408 of 2014)
06 February 2025
[Abhay S. Oka* and Ujjal Bhuyan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Trial court convicted the appellants under Sections 302 and 323 
read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. High Court 
altered the conviction to Section 304 Part II, IPC. Whether the 
identity of the appellants as accused was established. Appellants, 
if entitled to acquittal.
Headnotes†
Evidence – Identity as accused not established – Trial court 
convicted the appellants u/ss.302, 323 r/w s.34, IPC – High 
Court altered the conviction to s.304 Part II, IPC – Interference 
with:
Held: Identity of the present appellants as accused was not 
established before the Court by any of the witnesses – There 
was no evidence against the appellants – When the prosecution 
alleges that a particular person has committed an offence, it is its 
duty to establish the identity of the accused as the person who 
has committed the offence by adducing evidence – This is very 
fundamental going to the root of the matter however, was ignored 
by the Sessions Court and the High Court – Impugned judgments 
as regards the appellants are quashed and set aside – Appellants 
acquitted. [Para 5]
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Identity as accused not established; Court Witnesses; Hearsay 
Evidence.
* Author


--- PAGE 2 ---
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1175
Gopal Singh & Anr. v. State of Uttarakhand
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1408 of 2014
From the Judgment and Order dated 24.04.2012 of the High Court 
of Uttarakhand at Nainital in CRLA No. 187 of 2003
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
H. L. Chumber, Ms. Roopa Paul, Parveen Paul, Satyendra Kumar, 
Roshan Singh Thakur, Shivam Birt, Vishal Rathee.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Akshat Kumar, Ms. Anubha Dhulia.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Abhay S Oka, J.
1.	
Initially, this appeal was preferred by the three accused. Appellant 
no.1-Hari Singh (accused no.1) is no more. The appeal survives 
insofar as the appellant no.2-Gopal Singh (accused no.4) and 
appellant no.3-Avtar Singh (accused no.5)are concerned. PW-1-
Soban Singh is the complainant, and the deceased, Gaje Singh, was 
his brother-in-law. A total of five accused were charge-sheeted for the 
offences punishable under Sections 302 and 323 read with Section 34 
of the Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘the IPC’). The appellants were 
convicted by the Sessions Court and were sentenced to undergo 
life imprisonment. The High Court brought down the conviction to 
Section 304 Part II of the IPC by the impugned judgment.
2.	
The case of the prosecution is that PW-1, the deceased and the 
accused were residents of the same village, and there was a prior 
enmity between them.  On 21st November 1997, at around 10:30 
p.m., PW-1 was going to the latrine accompanied by the deceased, 
and when they reached the stand post near the village, stones were 
thrown at them by the accused, who had sticks and stones in their 
hands. All of them assaulted PW-1 and the deceased Gaje Singh. 
One Raghuvir Singh (PW-3) took PW-1 and the deceased to his 
house. PW-1 had lost consciousness. On the next day, PW-3 and 


--- PAGE 3 ---
1176
[2025] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
others tried to take the deceased to the hospital, but he died on the 
way. The prosecution evidence rests on two alleged eye-witnesses, 
namely,    PW-1-Soban Singh and PW-3-Raghuvir Singh. The learned 
counsel appearing for the respondent-State has also relied upon the 
depositions of Court Witnesses no.1 to 4.
3.	
With the assistance of the learned counsel appearing for the parties, 
we have perused the evidence of PW-1. The first paragraph of his 
examination-in-chief records that when his evidence was recorded, 
the present appellants were not present in the court. Though PW-1 
deposed ascribing a role to all the accused persons in the assault on 
the deceased and himself, PW-1 did not identify the present appellants 
as the accused in the Court as they were not brought to the Court. 
Therefore, from the evidence of PW-1, the identity of the appellants 
(appellant nos.2 and 3) as accused was not established. PW-3 is 
not an eyewitness, and he deposed that after he heard shouts, he 
ran towards the side from where the shouts were coming, and he 
saw the accused in the light of the torch which he was carrying. He 
stated that he recognised the accused in the light of the torch. Even 
his examination-in-chief records that the present appellants were not 
present in the Court, and therefore, even PW-3 has not identified 
the present appellants as accused. 
4.	
Four court witnesses were examined. We have perused their evidence 
as well. The first Court Witness is Balwant Singh (CW-1), who is not 
an eyewitness. All that he states is that in the morning of the incident, 
at around 05:00 a.m., he heard loud voices of the weeping of the 
villagers and saw marks of injuries on the head of the deceased, 
and blood was oozing from the injuries. He further stated what was 
told to him by PW-3 about the accused assaulting the deceased. 
This part of the evidence is a piece of hearsay evidence. CW-2-Pyuli 
Devi, who is the wife of PW-1, is also not an eyewitness, and she 
again deposed based on what PW-1 told her about the assault by the 
accused. So, this part of her evidence is also a hearsay evidence. As 
far as CW-3-Fateh Singh is concerned, he did not depose anything 
about the incident in his examination-in-chief. However, on being 
questioned by the public prosecutor, he stated that PW-3 brought 
the deceased to his house at 04-05:00 a.m., where the deceased 
told him that five persons, namely, Hari Singh, Raje Singh, Kalam 
Singh, son of Raje Singh and one other boy assaulted him. Apart 
from the fact that even according to the witness, the deceased did 


--- PAGE 4 ---
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1177
Gopal Singh & Anr. v. State of Uttarakhand
not specifically name the present appellants, we find that his version 
regarding the deceased disclosing the names of the accused is an 
omission, as is evident from the cross-examination made by the 
defence counsel.
5.	
Therefore, this is a case where the identity of the present appellants 
as accused was not established before the Court by any of the 
witnesses. It is axiomatic that when the prosecution alleges that 
a particular person has committed an offence, it is the duty of the 
prosecution to establish the identity of the accused as the person 
who has committed the offence by adducing evidence. In this case, 
the evidence of both PW-1 and PW-3 was recorded in the absence 
of the appellants. They had named the appellants. However, they 
did not identify the appellants in court as the same persons whom 
they had seen committing the offence. This is something which is 
very fundamental which goes to the root of the matter and has been 
ignored by the Sessions Court and the High Court.
6.	
The trial court initially convicted the accused for an offence punishable 
under Sections 302 and 323 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (for short, “the IPC”). The High Court, by the impugned 
judgment, brought down the conviction of the appellants to 304 Part 
II of the IPC.
7.	
As it is a case of no evidence against the present appellants, the 
impugned judgments, only as far as the present appellants are 
concerned, are hereby quashed and set aside. They are acquitted 
of the offences alleged against them. 
8.	
The bail bonds of the appellants are cancelled.
9.	
The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
10.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
