--- PAGE 1 ---
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 897 : 2025 INSC 378
Sudam Prabhakar Achat 
v. 
The State of Maharashtra
(Criminal Appeal No. 641 of 2024)
21 March 2025
[B.R. Gavai* and Augustine George Masih, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as to whether the conviction u/s.302 IPC could be 
converted into s.304 Part I or Part II IPC.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.304 Part I, 300 exception IV, 302 – 
Culpable homicide not amounting to murder – Alteration 
of conviction to a lesser offence – Testimony of related 
witnesses  – Reliability – Quarrel on account of previous 
enimity between the accused persons and the deceased who 
were brothers – Upon confrontation, the co-accused and his 
son-appellant became aggressive, and the co-accused armed 
with axe and the appellant armed with stick assaulted the 
deceased and his son-complainant, resulting in injuries to 
them – Deceased succumbed to his injuries the same night 
and the complainant succumbed to his injuries, a month later – 
Order of conviction and sentence of the accused u/ss.302/34 
and 324/34 by the courts below – Correctness:
Held: No reason to interfere with the finding that the death of the 
deceased was homicidal, and it was the appellant along with the 
co-accused who caused injuries to the deceased resulting in his 
death – All the witnesses are related to the deceased – Merely 
because the witnesses are relatives of the deceased and as such 
are interested witnesses, that alone cannot be a ground to discard 
their testimony – Testimony of such witnesses to be scrutinized 
with greater caution and circumspection – Possibility of a quarrel 
taking place on account of previous enmity between the accused 
persons and the deceased; and in a sudden fight in the heat of 
the moment, the appellant along with the co-accused assaulting 
the deceased cannot be ruled out – Weapons used are stick and 
* Author


--- PAGE 2 ---
898
[2025] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the blunt side of the axe, easily available in any agricultural field – 
Thus, cannot be said that there was any premeditation – Appellant 
is alleged to have used the stick whereas the co-accused is said 
to have used the blunt side of the axe – If their intention was to 
kill the deceased, no reason as to why the co-accused would 
not have used the sharp side of the axe – Nature of injury and 
the evidence of the prosecution witnesses would also not show 
that the appellant had taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel 
manner – Thus, the case would not fall under the ambit of s.302 
and the appellant is entitled to benefit of exception IV of s.300 – 
Conviction u/s.302 converted to Part I of s.304 – Appellant having 
already undergone the sentence of 6 years 10 months, sentenced 
to the period already undergone. [Paras 7-15]
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Testimony of witnesses; Previous enimity; Post-Mortem Report; 
Evidence of the Medical Officer; Homicidal; Related witnesses; 
Interested witnesses; Testimony; Premeditation; Blunt side of 
the axe; Undue advantage or acted in a cruel manner; Benefit 
of exception IV of s.300 IPC; Conviction u/s.302 converted to 
Part I of s.304 IPC.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
641 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 10.08.2021 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in CRLA No. 88 of 2013
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Ms. Deeplaxmi Subhash Matwankar, Dr. Ravindra Chingale, 
Ms. Manreet Kaur.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Ms. Rukhmini Bobde, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Aaditya Aniruddha 
Pande, Ms. Soumya Priyadarshinee, Amlaan Kumar, Jatin Dhamija, 
Naveen Kumar Bhardwaj.


--- PAGE 3 ---
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
899
Sudam Prabhakar Achat v. The State of Maharashtra
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
B.R. Gavai, J.
1.	
The present appeal challenges the final judgment and order dated 
10th August 2021, passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay in Criminal Appeal No. 88 of 2013, whereby 
the High Court dismissed the appeal filed by the Appellant (Accused 
No.2) thereby affirming the judgment and order dated 5th December 
2012 rendered by the Additional Sessions Judge-I, Malegaon, District 
Nashik (hereinafter referred to as “the trial court”) in Sessions Case 
No.76 of 2009 thereby convicting the appellant under Section 302 read 
with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred 
to as “IPC”) and sentencing him to undergo rigorous imprisonment 
for life along with fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default whereof rigorous 
imprisonment for two months. The appellant was also convicted 
under Section 324 read with Section 34 of the IPC and sentenced 
to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years along with fine of 
Rs.500/-, in default whereof rigorous imprisonment for one month. 
2.	
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeal are as under:
2.1	 The case of the prosecution is that Bapu Motiram Achat 
(complainant), Motiram Deoram Achat (deceased), Sudam 
Prabhakar Achat (appellant herein) and Prabhat Deoram Achat 
(co-accused) are all residents of Sitane, Taluka Malegaon, 
District Nashik. The deceased and the co-accused were brothers. 
Their agricultural fields were situated adjacent to each other 
with a common boundary and a common well. Further, the 
complainant is the son of the deceased and the appellant is 
the son of the co-accused. 
2.2	 On 15th July 2009, when the complainant had gone to his field, 
the appellant hurled abuses at the complainant with respect to 
the use of common boundary (Bundh) to operate the electric 
pump on the well. The complainant returned home and narrated 
the incident to his parents. Thereafter, the complainant and his 
parents went to the field at 12:00 Noon and asked the appellant 
an explanation as to why he was obstructing the complainant. 


--- PAGE 4 ---
900
[2025] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Upon such confrontation, the appellant and the co-accused 
became aggressive. The co-accused armed with an axe and 
the appellant armed with a stick assaulted the deceased and 
the complainant.
2.3	 The complainant and the deceased both sustained injuries. 
The people working in the nearby field namely, Chhagan 
Krishna Achat (PW-1), Krishna Deoram Achat and mother of 
the complainant i.e. Sojabai (PW-7), separated and took the 
complainant and the deceased to the Government Hospital, 
Malegaon. The report of the complainant was recorded at 
4:15 PM and Crime Case No.171 of 2009 was registered under 
Sections 323, 326, 504 and 506 read with Section 34 of the IPC. 
The deceased was thereafter shifted to Government Hospital, 
Dhule. However, he succumbed to injuries on the same night 
and Section 302 of the IPC was added.
2.4	 The Investigating Officer, Mahindra Ahire (for short, “IO”) 
prepared a spot panchnama (Exhibit 26). The appellant was 
arrested on the next day i.e., 16th July 2009. Further, inquest 
panchnama (Exhibit 20) was drawn, clothes of the deceased 
were seized under panchnama (Exhibit 21), post-mortem was 
carried out and the report (Exhibit 15) was prepared. The 
co-accused in police custody, gave a memorandum statement 
(Exhibit 11) which resulted in the recovery of the axe and stick 
(Exhibit 12). At the request of the IO, evidence of eye-witnesses 
were recorded under Section 164 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter, referred to as “CrPC”) by the 
Judicial Magistrate.
2.5	 After completion of the investigation, chargesheet was filed by 
the IO in the Court of Judicial Magistrate, FC, Malegaon and 
was registered as R.C.C. No.578 of 2009. Since the case was 
exclusively triable by the Sessions Court, it was committed to 
the Sessions Court. The trial court framed charges against the 
appellant and co-accused. The charges were read over and 
explained to both of them to which they pleaded not guilty and 
claimed to be tried. Their defence was that of total denial and 
false implication in the present crime and that the deceased 
slipped while he was in the field because of the tin-sheet of 
the tin-shed and sustained injuries.


--- PAGE 5 ---
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
901
Sudam Prabhakar Achat v. The State of Maharashtra
2.6	 To bring home the guilt of the accused persons, the prosecution 
examined eight witnesses and exhibited nine documents. 
The accused persons did not examine any of the prosecution 
witnesses or any witness in support of their defence.
2.7	 At the end of trial, the trial court convicted the appellant and 
the co-accused as aforesaid.
2.8	 Being aggrieved thereby, the appellant and the co-accused 
preferred a criminal appeal before the High Court challenging 
the judgment and order of conviction and sentence awarded by 
the trial court. The High Court vide the impugned final judgment 
and order dismissed the appeal.
2.9	 Being aggrieved thereby, a special leave petition was filed, in 
which notice was issued limited to the question as to whether 
the conviction under Section 302 of the IPC could be converted 
into Section 304 Part I or Part II of the IPC. Subsequently, by 
an order dated 2nd February 2024, leave was granted.
3.	
We have heard Ms. Deeplaxmi Subhash Matwankar, learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellant and Ms. Rukmini Bobde, learned 
counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondent-State.
4.	
Ms. Matwankar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant 
submits that the prosecution relies only on the eye witnesses who 
are the relatives of the deceased. It is submitted that the relatives 
of the deceased being interested witnesses, the conviction only on 
the basis of their testimony would not be sustainable in law. She 
therefore submitted that the conviction is not sustainable and the 
appeal deserves to be allowed.
5.	
Ms. Matwankar, in the alternative, submits that, from the evidence 
on record, it is clear that the offence would not come under the 
ambit of Section 302 of IPC and at the most, it would come under 
Part I or II of Section 304 of IPC.
6.	
Per contra, Ms. Bobde, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
State submits that both the courts below concurrently, on the basis of 
the perusal of the evidence, found the accused guilty of the offence 
charged with. She submits that, in view of the concurrent findings 
of fact, no interference is warranted in the present appeal.
7.	
From the perusal of the Post-Mortem Report (Exhibit-15) and the 
evidence of the Medical Officer (PW-4), we do not find any reason to 


--- PAGE 6 ---
902
[2025] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
interfere with the finding that the death of the deceased is homicidal. 
We also do not find any reason to interfere with the finding of the 
trial court that it is the appellant along with the co-accused who have 
caused injuries to the deceased resulting in his death.
8.	
Having come to the conclusion that the appellant and the 
co-accused are liable for the death of the deceased, we will have to 
now examine whether the prosecution has proved its case that the 
offence committed by the appellant would come under the ambit of 
Section 302 IPC or it can be altered into a lesser offence.
9.	
No doubt that all the witnesses are related to the deceased. As a 
matter of fact, the deceased and the complainant on the one hand 
and the accused persons on the other hand are also closely related 
to each other inasmuch they are first cousins. It is however a settled 
position of law that merely because the witnesses are relatives of the 
deceased and as such are interested witnesses, that alone cannot 
be a ground to discard their testimony. The only requirement is that 
the testimony of such witnesses has to be scrutinized with greater 
caution and circumspection.
10.	 A perusal of the evidence of Chhagan Krishna Achat (PW-1) who 
is the nephew of the deceased would reveal that the fields of the 
accused persons and the deceased are adjoining each other. His 
testimony would further reveal that when he returned to the field 
on the date of the incident, he saw that there was a quarrel going 
on between the accused persons and the deceased. His testimony 
would further reveal that the co-accused Prabhakar was assaulting 
the deceased with the blunt side of the axe and the appellant was 
armed with a stick and he assaulted the deceased with the said 
stick. It is to be noted that Motiram died when he was taken to the 
Government Hospital, Dhule. The other injured person Bapu Motiram 
succumbed to injury about a month after the date of incident.
11.	 A perusal of evidence of PW-1 would reveal that the deceased was 
standing on the bundh which was only 15-20 feet on the northern side 
of the house of the co-accused. To the same effect is the evidence 
of the other eye witnesses.
12.	 From the evidence of the prosecution witnesses itself, it is clear that 
the place of incident is near the house of accused persons. The 
possibility of a quarrel taking place on account of previous enmity 


--- PAGE 7 ---
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
903
Sudam Prabhakar Achat v. The State of Maharashtra
between the accused persons and the deceased; and in a sudden 
fight in the heat of the moment, the appellant along with the co-
accused assaulting the deceased cannot be ruled out. It can further 
be seen that the weapons used are a stick and the blunt side of 
the axe. These tools are easily available in any agricultural field. It 
therefore cannot be said that there was any premeditation.
13.	 It is further to be noted that the appellant is alleged to have used 
the stick whereas the co-accused is said to have used the blunt side 
of the axe. If their intention was to kill the deceased, there was no 
reason as to why the co-accused would not have used the sharp side 
of the axe. The nature of injury and the evidence of the prosecution 
witnesses would also not show that the appellant had taken undue 
advantage or acted in a cruel manner.
14.	 In that view of the matter, we find that the present case would not fall 
under the ambit of Section 302 of IPC and the appellant would be 
entitled to benefit of Exception IV of Section 300 of IPC. It is further 
to be noted that the appellant has already undergone the sentence 
of 6 years 10 months.
15.	 We are therefore inclined to partly allow the appeal. In the result, 
we pass the following order:
(i)	
The appeal is partly allowed;
(ii)	
The conviction under Section 302 IPC is converted to Part I of 
Section 304 IPC;
(iii)	 The appellant is sentenced to the period already undergone; and
(iv)	 The appellant is directed to be released forthwith if not required 
in any other case.
Result of the case: Appeal partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
