--- PAGE 1 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 1816 : 2025 INSC 577
Chunni Bai 
v. 
State of Chhattisgarh
(Criminal Appeal No. 2265 of 2025)
28 April 2025
[B.V. Nagarathna and  
Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the accused at the time of commission of crime was 
incapable of making conscious and informed decision or was 
suffering from certain mental incapacity or unsoundness of mind; 
Whether a benefit of doubt may be extended to the accused as 
regards proof of intention and mens rea.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.84, 299, 300, 302, 304 Part II – Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 – ss.161, 313 – Evidence Act, 1872 – 
ss.105, 165 – Appellant killed her minor daughters – Appellant 
denied her guilt in a statement recorded u/s.313 of CrPC and 
claimed that she had no knowledge of what had happened 
and how it happened and that she was under the influence 
of some invisible power – Trial Court convicted appellant for 
offence punishable u/s.302 of IPC – The High Court upheld 
the conviction of the appellant u/s.302 of the IPC – Appellant’s 
plea that the appellant was not in a proper mental condition 
at the time of commission of the offence:
Held: No infirmity in the finding given by the Trial Court as well 
as the High Court that the appellant had assaulted both of her 
daughters, which caused grievous injuries, thereby causing their 
death – In the peculiar facts and circumstances as revealed in the 
present case, and also keeping in mind that the incident happened 
in a rural setting and the appellant not being highly educated, the 
possibility of confusing her unstable mental condition or temporary 
lapse of judgmental power bordering on temporary insanity cannot 
be completely ruled out which the appellant attributed as coming 
under the influence of invisible power, for the purpose of giving a 
* Author


--- PAGE 2 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1817
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
benefit of doubt about the non-existence of “intention” – Appellant 
had a cordial relationship with all the family members including 
her children, which clearly indicates absence of any ill feelings 
on the part of the appellant to provide any basis for any motive 
to commit the crime which will prove the presence of “intention” 
to commit the act – The statement of the father-in-law (PW-5) 
of the appellant recorded that 15 days prior to the incident, the 
appellant was babbling nonsense, saying that she is Mata, Budi 
Dai etc. – Further, it was also mentioned that the appellant was 
taken to the Psychiatrist at Government Hospital, Durg where 
she was given medicine and was advised to follow up – Under 
the circumstances, in view of the plea taken by the appellant, a 
reasonable doubt can be said to have arisen as regards existence 
of intention, thus of mens rea for causing death in the present 
case as – (i) During the commission of crime, the appellant was 
shouting that she is killing her children; (ii) Post the incident, 
the appellant, on being asked the reason behind her act, kept 
on crying and repeating that she has killed her children – This 
is corroborated by other prosecution witnesses as well; (iii) The 
appellant did not try to flee the scene of crime even after being 
left alone in the house by PW-1; (iv) Complete absence of motive 
behind the commission of crime in background of the fact that the 
appellant loved her children very much, as also acknowledged 
by the prosecution witness; (v) The nature of relation between 
the accused and the deceased i.e., of a mother and child; (vi) 
Absence of any strained domestic relationships or any such 
motivating factor – However, in the absence of any conclusive 
medical evidence with regards to the mental condition of the 
appellant, it may not be enough to extend the benefit of exception 
as encapsulated in s.84 IPC so as to acquit the appellant in the 
present case – Nevertheless, the circumstances are enough to 
cast a shadow of doubt about the existence of the intention of the 
appellant to commit the crime in the present case – Thus, in the 
present case “intention of causing death” cannot be said to have 
proved – Therefore, the conviction of the appellant converted to 
under Part II of s.304 IPC is from that of s.302 IPC. [Paras 16, 
36, 43, 53, 57, 58, 60]
Penal Code, 1860 – Murder and Culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder – Difference between – Discussed. 
[Paras 18-21]


--- PAGE 3 ---
1818
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Evidence Act, 1872 – s.105 – Burden of Proof to prove existence 
of circumstances which would attract any of the pleaded 
exceptions is on accused. [Paras 28-31]
Penal Code, 1860 – s.84 – Legal insanity vis-à-vis medical 
insanity – Discussed. [Para 33]
Criminal Law – Rustic person – Not aware of various mental 
disorders/illness – Discussed. [Para 36]
Evidence – Grave offences – Direct evidence available – 
Absence of proof of motive or intention:
Held: In cases where direct evidence is available that links the 
accused to the offence, absence of proof of motive or intention 
does not preclude conviction of the accused – However, in cases 
where the plea taken by the accused is such that it raises a 
concern about the mental stability of the accused, the existence 
or lack of motive assumes great significance – This is especially 
true in cases involving grave offences such as murder, where a 
complete absence of any kind of motive which ordinarily impels 
a person to commit such a crime may lend credence to the plea 
of insanity, as in the present case, where a mother has taken the 
life of her own children of tender age apparently in absence of 
any motive. [Para 39] 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – ss.161, 162 – Evidence 
Act, 1872 – s.165 – Court to put questions to witnesses to 
elicit the truth:
Held: Even though the statements recorded u/s.161 of CrPC 
cannot be used for any purposes in a trial due to the embargo 
placed u/s.162 CrPC, however, the power of the Trial Court 
u/s.165 Evidence Act is wide enough to put questions based on 
the statement u/s.161 CrPC to any witness or party at any stage 
to secure the ends of justice – Trial Court ought to have taken 
into consideration the peculiar circumstances of the case and the 
statement of PW-5 recorded u/s.161 CrPC to put right questions 
to the parties and witnesses to ascertain the motive or intention of 
the appellant in committing the crime. [Paras 54, 56, 64]
Case Law Cited
Rampal Singh v. State of U.P. [2012] 7 SCR 160 : (2012) 8 SCC 
289; State of A.P. v. Rayavarapu Punnayya [1977] 1 SCR 601 : 


--- PAGE 4 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1819
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
(1976) 4 SCC 382; Raghunandan v. State of U.P. [1974] 3 SCR 
92 : (1974) 4 SCC 186; Sidhartha Vashisht v. State (NCT of Delhi) 
[2010] 4 SCR 103 : (2010) 6 SCC 1 – relied on.
Satyavir Singh Rathi, Assistant Commissioner of Police v. State 
[2011] 6 SCR 138 : AIR 2011 SC 1748; Munshi Ram v. Delhi 
Admn. [1968] 2 SCR 455 : AIR 1968 SC 702; State of U.P. v. 
Mohd. Musheer Khan, AIR 1977 SC 2226; James Martin v. State 
of Kerala [2003] Supp. 6 SCR 910 : (2004) 2 SCC 203; Dahyabhai 
Chhaganbhai Thakkar v. State of Gujarat [1964] 7 SCR 361 : AIR 
1964 SC 1563 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal Code, 1860; Evidence 
Act, 1872.
List of Keywords
Murder; Culpable homicide not amounting to murder; Intention; 
Mens rea; Actus reus; Motive; Star witness; Crime committed by 
mother; Section 313 CrPC; Influence of some invisible power; 
Beyond reasonable doubt; Legal insanity; Medical insanity; 
Burden of proof; General exceptions of IPC; Standard of proof; 
Preponderance of probability; Reasonable doubt; Rustic persons; 
Mental disorders/illness; Direct evidence; Lack of motive.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
2265 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 21.11.2023 of the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in CRLA No. 1035 of 2016
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
S. Mahendran. 
Advs. for the Respondent:
Avdhesh Singh, A.A.G., Mrs. Prerna Dhall, Piyush Yadav, 
Ms. Akansha Singh, Gopinath Mr, Prashant Singh. 


--- PAGE 5 ---
1820
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeal has been preferred against judgment and order 
dated 21.11.2023 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in Criminal Appeal No. 1035 of 2016 
whereby, the High Court upheld the conviction and sentence imposed 
upon the present appellant under Section 302 of the Indian Penal 
Code (hereinafter referred to as ‘IPC’).
3.	
The case of the prosecution in brief is that on 05.06.2015 at about 
9 AM in the village of Bharadkala, District Bemetara, State of 
Chhattisgarh, the appellant, namely Chunni Bai, assaulted her two 
daughters, namely Kumari Yogita Sahu, aged 5 years and Kumari 
Nisha Sahu, aged 3 years with an iron crowbar leading to grievous 
injuries thereby causing the death of both the daughters. The incident 
was witnessed by Sonam Sahu (PW-1), who is the sister-in-law of 
the appellant who also lived in the same house. 
4.	
On the same day of occurrence, a complaint was lodged before the 
Saja Police Station by Laxman Prasad Mishra (PW-3), a neighbour 
of the appellant, on the basis of which an FIR No. 126/15 was 
registered under Section 302 IPC. On completion of the investigation, 
the appellant was put on trial. 
5.	
According to the star witness, Sonam Sahu (PW-1), in the morning 
at around 9 am on the fateful date, while she was doing household 
chores, she heard the appellant shouting in her room that she was 
killing her daughters, on hearing of which she went inside the room 
where PW-1 saw both the children on the bed, soaked in blood, 
and saw the appellant hitting the younger child Nisha with an iron 
crowbar. PW-1 then snatched the crowbar from the appellant and 
rushed out to inform her uncle who stayed next door. Thereafter, 
she informed her brother and niece of the incident. Other relatives 
were also informed.
6.	
The testimony of the eyewitness PW-1 was corroborated by other 
witnesses, most of whom were relatives and who lived nearby 


--- PAGE 6 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1821
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
and came to the house soon after the incident. They also saw the 
appellant crying and shouting that she had killed her children. The 
injured children were taken to the hospital but were declared dead. 
7.	
According to the testimony of the doctor present on duty on the day 
of the incident, Dr. G.S. Thakur (PW-18), both the girls had died 
before reaching the hospital. PW-18 described the injuries found 
during the autopsy of the elder daughter, Yogita Sahu, as follows: 
“… There was a crushed wound in the right temporal part 
of the head, which measured 10 centimeters in length and 
was up to the skull bone. A crushed wound is present 0.5 
cm below the said wound. Its length was 2.0 centimeters 
and its depth was up to the skull bone. The body’s right 
occipito-parietal bone of the head was broken and had 
sunk into the brain, which measured 16.0 cm in length 
and 8.0 cm in width. The entire body of the dead body 
had turned pale.
4. All the injuries found on the dead body were caused by 
hard and blunt objects and before death. While examining 
the skull and spinal cord of the dead body, I found that a 
piece of bone was stuck in the occipital part of the brain 
and bleeding was present in the occipital part of the brain. 
A long hair-line fracture, was present in the skull of the 
body. Which was present from the occipital bone to the 
fatal bone.
…………………………..” 
PW-18 gave his opinion about the cause of death in the following 
words:
“In my opinion, the cause of death was bleeding in the 
stomach and stoppage of heart and respiratory rhythm due 
to injury in the organic part of the brain which is a result 
of hitting the head with a hard and blunt object. Nature: In 
my opinion the nature of death was homicidal….”
8.	
Similarly, with respect to the autopsy of younger daughter, Nisha 
Sahu, PW-18 noted the following injuries: 
“…There was a visible injury with blood all around the 
left eye of the dead body. Whose measurement was 40 


--- PAGE 7 ---
1822
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
X 30 centimetres. The left occipital portion of the head 
contained a crushed injury measuring 3.0 X 30 cm. The 
caudal portion of the said injury contained a crushed 
injury measuring 30 X 2.0 cm in length with a depth up 
to the skull. A congested bruise of blood was present in 
the left scapular area. It measured 9.0 X 20 cm in length, 
extending from the central part to the outer part. The above 
mentioned wounds were inflicted with a hard and blunt 
object and were inflicted before death…”
The cause of death of Nisha Sahu was opined to be due to cardiac 
and respiratory arrest due to bleeding in the brain and injuries to 
organs of the brain and the said injuries were caused by hitting the 
head with a hard and blunt object and it was homicidal in nature. 
9.	
Based on the memorandum statement of the appellant vide Ex. 
P/10, the crime weapon i.e., the iron pounder was seized vide Ex. 
P/4 and the FSL report vide Ex. P/31 which confirmed the presence 
of human blood on the seized weapon. 
10.	 To support the case of the prosecution, as many as 20 witnesses were 
examined. The statement of the appellant was recorded under Section 
313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to 
as ‘CrPC’), wherein the appellant denied guilt and claimed that she 
had no knowledge of what had happened and how it happened and 
that she was under the influence of some invisible power. However, 
no defence witness was produced before the court. 
11.	 The Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Bemetara, in Sessions Trial 
No. 76/2015, upon appreciation of evidence and after hearing of 
parties concluded that based on the postmortem reports proved by 
the doctor (PW-18), the deaths of both daughters were due to serious 
injuries on their heads. Further, it was held that the author of the 
crime was the appellant, supported by the eye-witness Sonam Sahu 
(PW-1) which was corroborated by other prosecution witnesses. The 
Trial Court, thereafter, vide judgment dated 29.06.2016, convicted the 
appellant for the offence punishable under Section 302 of IPC and 
sentenced the appellant to undergo imprisonment for life with fine of 
Rs. 1000/- and in default of payment of fine, to undergo additional 
rigorous imprisonment for 1 month.
12.	 In the appeal against the above order, the High Court in Criminal 
Appeal No. 1035 of 2016 vide order dated 21.11.2023, upheld 


--- PAGE 8 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1823
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
the conviction of the appellant under Section 302 of the IPC. The 
plea taken by the appellant before the High Court was that the 
prosecution failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt and 
that the appellant was not in proper mental condition at the time of 
commission of the offence. 
13.	 The High Court relied on the medical opinion of Dr. G.S. Thakur (PW-
18) and the postmortem reports which stated that the cause of death 
was cardiorespiratory arrest caused by intracerebral haemorrhage 
and injury to vital parts of brain, as a result of the head being hit by 
a hard and blunt object, thereby concluding that the nature of death 
was homicidal. Further, the High Court took into consideration the 
testimonies of the prosecution witnesses, seizure of the crime weapon 
and its FSL report to observe that the appellant had assaulted her 
daughters with an iron pounder causing grievous injuries leading to 
their death. Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed. 
ANALYSIS BY THIS COURT
14.	 Since the death of the two girls was not denied and was proved 
on the basis of the evidence on record, the first issue that is to be 
addressed is whether the death was caused by the appellant. For 
this, we have to revisit the testimonies of the prosecution witness, 
more importantly, Sonam Sahu (PW-1) who is the sole eyewitness 
of the incident. PW-1 has specifically stated in her testimony that 
when she rushed towards the room upon hearing the scream of the 
appellant, she saw the appellant hitting her younger daughter Nisha 
with an iron pounder while the elder daughter, Yogita was lying in 
bed unconscious, soaked in blood. It is to be noted that as per 
PW-1’s testimony, no other person was present in the house at that 
time other than appellant and her two daughters. This testimony of 
PW-1 finds corroboration from the statements of other prosecution 
witnesses such as Sanat Kumar (PW-16), who is the cousin brother 
of the appellant’s husband. As per PW-16, he was informed about 
the incident by Sonam Sahu (PW-1) who came crying to his house, 
which is adjacent to the house of the appellant. When PW-16 reached 
the place of occurrence, he saw that the appellant was crying and 
saying that she had killed Nisha and Babli (Yogita) and repeated this 
statement upon being asked the reason behind killing them. Then, 
PW-16 went to the room of the appellant and saw both daughters 
lying unconscious on bed, soaked in blood. 


--- PAGE 9 ---
1824
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
15.	 Similarly, the contemporaneous testimonies of Rekha Sahu (PW-2), 
Laxman Prasad Mishra (PW-3), Ram Kumar Verma (PW-6), Manuwa 
(PW-9), Namdev (PW-10), Harish Kumar Sahu (PW-11) and Kaushilya 
Bai (PW-15) also corroborate the testimony of Sonam Sahu (PW-1) 
that the daughters were bleeding, lying unconscious and that the 
appellant was crying and saying that she had killed her children. 
16.	 Further, as per the testimony of the investigating officer K.M. Mishra 
(PW-19), the crime weapon i.e., the iron pounder was seized based on 
the memorandum statement of the appellant, although the witnesses 
to the recording of such memorandum statement i.e., Ram Kumar 
Verma (PW-6) and Bhuniram Sahu (PW-8) denied that any such 
statement had been given by the appellant in their presence. The 
FSL report confirmed the presence of human blood on the seized 
iron pounder. Therefore, considering the above evidence including 
the post mortem report discussed above, we are of the opinion that 
there is no infirmity in the finding given by the Trial Court as well as 
the High Court that the appellant had assaulted both of her daughters, 
which caused grievous injuries, thereby causing their death.
17.	 Once homicide is proved being committed by the appellant, the next 
consideration will be whether such homicide was “culpable homicide” 
within the meaning of Section 299 IPC. If it is found to be “culpable 
homicide”, further consideration will be whether it is “culpable homicide 
not amounting to murder” which is punishable under Section 304 
IPC or “murder” as defined under Section 300 IPC, punishable under 
Section 302 IPC, under which the appellant has been convicted and 
punished by the Trial Court which was upheld by the High Court.
18.	 The difference between “murder” and “culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder” has been succinctly explained by this Court 
in State of A.P. v. Rayavarapu Punnayya, (1976) 4 SCC 382 in 
the following words:
“12. In the scheme of the Penal Code, “culpable homicide” 
is genus and “murder” its specie. All “murder” is “culpable 
homicide” but not vice-versa. Speaking generally, “culpable 
homicide”  sans  “special characteristics of murder”, is 
“culpable homicide not amounting to murder”. For the 
purpose of fixing punishment, proportionate to the gravity 
of this generic offence, the Code practically recognises 
three degrees of culpable homicide. The  first  is, what 


--- PAGE 10 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1825
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
may be called, “culpable homicide of the first degree”. 
This is the greatest form of culpable homicide, which is 
defined in Section 300 as “murder”. The second may be 
termed as “culpable homicide of the second degree”. This 
is punishable under the first part of Section 304. Then, 
there is “culpable homicide of the third degree”. This is 
the lowest type of culpable homicide and the punishment 
provided for it is, also, the lowest among the punishments 
provided for the three grades. Culpable homicide of this 
degree is punishable under the second part of Section 304.”
19.	 The difference was further elucidated in Rampal Singh v. State of 
U.P., (2012) 8 SCC 289 in the following words: 
“18. This Court in  Vineet Kumar Chauhan  v.  State of 
U.P. [(2007) 14 SCC 660 : (2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 915] noticed 
that academic distinction between “murder” and “culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder” had vividly been 
brought out by this Court in State of A.P. v. Rayavarapu 
Punnayya [(1976) 4 SCC 382 : 1976 SCC (Cri) 659] where 
it was observed as under: (Vineet Kumar case [(2007) 
14 SCC 660 : (2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 915], SCC pp. 665-66, 
para 16)
“16. … that the safest way of approach to the interpretation 
and application of Sections 299 and 300 IPC is to keep 
in focus the key words used in various clauses of the 
said sections. Minutely comparing each of the clauses of 
Sections 299 and 300 IPC and drawing support from the 
decisions of this Court in Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab [AIR 
1958 SC 465 : 1958 Cri LJ 818] and Rajwant Singh v. State 
of Kerala [AIR 1966 SC 1874 : 1966 Cri LJ 1509] , speaking 
for the Court, R.S. Sarkaria, J. neatly brought out the points 
of distinction between the two offences, which have been 
time and again reiterated. Having done so, the Court said 
that wherever the court is confronted with the question 
whether the offence is ‘murder’ or ‘culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder’, on the facts of a case, it [would] be 
convenient for it to approach the problem in three stages. 
The question to be considered at the first stage would be, 
whether the accused has done an act by doing which he 


--- PAGE 11 ---
1826
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
has caused the death of another. Proof of such causal 
connection between the act of the accused and the death, 
leads to the second stage for considering whether that act 
of the accused amounts to ‘culpable homicide’ as defined 
in Section 299. … If the answer to this question is in the 
negative the offence would be ‘culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder’, punishable under the First or the 
Second Part of Section 304, depending, respectively, on 
whether the second or the third clause of Section 299 is 
applicable. If this question is found in the positive, but the 
case comes within any of the Exceptions enumerated in 
Section 300, the offence would still be ‘culpable homicide 
not amounting to murder’, punishable under the First Part 
of Section 304 IPC. It was, however, clarified that these 
were only broad guidelines to facilitate the task of the 
court and not cast-iron imperative.”
20.	 This Court in the aforesaid case of Rampal Singh (supra) further 
explained the difference between these two offences from the 
perspective of the punitive provisions of Sections 302 and 304 IPC 
by grading the offences in three categories as follows: 
“21. Sections 302 and 304 of the Code are primarily 
the punitive provisions. They declare what punishment a 
person would be liable to be awarded, if he commits either 
of the offences. An analysis of these two sections must 
be done having regard to what is common to the offences 
and what is special to each one of them. The offence of 
culpable homicide is thus an offence which may or may 
not be murder. If it is murder, then it is culpable homicide 
amounting to murder, for which punishment is prescribed 
in Section 302 of the Code. Section 304 deals with cases 
not covered by Section 302 and it divides the offence into 
two distinct classes, that is, (a) those in which the death 
is intentionally caused; and (b) those in which the death is 
caused unintentionally but knowingly. In the former case the 
sentence of imprisonment is compulsory and the maximum 
sentence admissible is imprisonment for life. In the latter 
case, imprisonment is only optional, and the maximum 
sentence only extends to imprisonment for 10 years. 
The first clause of Section 304 includes only those cases 


--- PAGE 12 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1827
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
in which offence is really “murder”, but mitigated by the 
presence of circumstances recognised in the Exceptions 
to Section 300 of the Code, the second clause deals only 
with the cases in which the accused has no intention of 
injuring anyone in particular. In this regard, we may also 
refer to the judgment of this Court in Fatta v. Emperor [AIR 
1931 Lah 63] , 1151. C. 476 (Refer: Penal Law of India by 
Dr Hari Singh Gour, Vol. 3, 2009.)”
21.	 From the above extracts, it can be understood that one of the criteria 
to determine, in any given case, as to whether the act amounts 
to “murder” or “culpable homicide not amounting to murder” is the 
presence or absence of intention of the offender. If the “intention” 
to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause 
death or the knowledge, which obviously has to be a conscious 
one, that it is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, 
cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death and 
commits such act “without any excuse” for incurring the risk of 
causing death or such injury, comes out aloud and clear in the 
case, it would be most appropriate to categorise it as a case of 
“murder” under Section 300 IPC in which event, penal provision 
of Section 302 IPC would be attracted. On the other hand, if the 
“intention” in causing the death or to causing such bodily injury is 
not so clear, the case will fall under the less stringent category of 
“culpable homicide not amounting to murder” as punishable under 
Section 304 IPC. 
22.	 In the case at hand, it can be said to have been proved beyond 
reasonable doubt that the appellant had caused the death of her 
two children and thus committed culpable homicide.
The evidence on record clearly shows that the appellant had caused 
the death of her children by hitting them with an iron crowbar on 
their heads. 
The crucial question however is, whether she had the intention 
to cause death of her children or had the intention to cause such 
bodily injury which was likely to cause death or whether she had the 
conscious knowledge that it was imminently dangerous that in all 
probability, it would cause death, or such bodily injury as is likely to 
cause death and committed the act without any excuse for incurring 
the risk of causing death or such injury?


--- PAGE 13 ---
1828
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
23.	 When a person performs an act, he is attributed with the intention to 
cause the natural consequences that follows from the act performed. 
There may be situations when the person makes the intention for 
performing an act known clearly by oral declaration or otherwise. 
However, it can be illusive when intention is not clearly spelt out or 
discernible, and the same has to be gathered from the surrounding 
facts and circumstances and the acts of the accused. 
24.	 In the present case, once the factum of homicide being committed 
by the appellant is proved beyond reasonable doubt and considering 
the nature of the injuries received by the minor victims at the hands 
of the appellants with iron crowbar on the basis of the medical and 
other evidence brought on record, it can be stated that the intention 
to commit homicide can certainly be inferred as had been done by 
the Trial Court and the High Court. 
However, we have certain reservations about such a conclusion 
being drawn by the courts below in respect of proof of “intention” 
or the conscious knowledge of what she was doing in the light of 
the peculiar facts and circumstances obtaining in the case. In our 
opinion, it cannot be conclusively held in the present case that the 
intention of the appellant or conscious knowledge of what she was 
doing, a component of mens rea, has been established beyond 
reasonable doubt.
25.	 It is well settled that in any criminal case, the burden of proof is on 
the prosecution to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt in order 
to secure conviction of the accused, that is to say that no reasonable 
doubt can be said to have arisen in the judicial mind of the court 
after appreciating the evidence presented, and the outcome reached 
by the prosecution is the only possible outcome in the given facts 
and circumstances of the case. 
This legal position is necessary for both the ingredients of “actus reus” 
and “mens rea”, though “mens rea” can sometimes be inferred from 
the nature of “actus reus”, and as far as “mens rea” is concerned, 
intention or guilty knowledge is certainly the most important facet. 
26.	 The case of the appellant, as evident from the records, is the claim 
of innocence and denial of the charges and the appellant made a 
specific plea while being examined under Section 313 CrPC that at 
the time of occurrence, she was under the influence of some invisible 


--- PAGE 14 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1829
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
power. However, the appellant did not produce any witness in support 
of her claim and produced only two documents. 
27.	 The appellant by taking the said plea is seeking to bring her case 
within the general exceptions as mentioned in IPC. 
Some of the general exceptions which are available under the Indian 
Penal Code to escape criminal liability are contained in Sections 76 
to 106 of IPC as well as five “Exceptions” mentioned in Section 300 
IPC, etc. 
The plea taken by the appellant of being under the influence of some 
invisible power can be understood to invoke Section 84 of the IPC, 
which reads as follows:
“84. Act of a person of unsound mind.—Nothing is an 
offence which is done by a person who, at the time of 
doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable 
of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what 
is either wrong or contrary to law.”
28.	 Though in a criminal case the burden of proof to establish a case 
beyond reasonable doubt is on the prosecution, however, under 
Section 105 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter referred 
as “Evidence Act”), the burden of proof to prove the existence of 
such circumstances which would attract any of the above pleaded 
exceptions is on the accused. 
Section 105 of the Evidence Act reads as follows: 
“105. When a person is accused of any offence, the 
burden of proving the existence of circumstances bringing 
the case within any of the General Exception in the 
Indian Penal Code (XLV of 1860), or within any special 
exception or proviso contained in any other part of the 
same Code, or in any law defining the offence, is upon 
him, and the Court shall presume the absence of such 
circumstances.”
29.	 At this juncture, it may be pertinent to note that the standard of 
proof for the accused required by law in such cases, in invoking 
any exception clause is preponderance of probability, which is also 
adopted in civil cases. [See: Satyavir Singh Rathi, Assistant 
Commissioner of Police v. State, AIR 2011 SC 1748; Munshi 


--- PAGE 15 ---
1830
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Ram v. Delhi Admn., AIR 1968 SC 702; State of U.P. v. Mohd. 
Musheer Khan, AIR 1977 SC 2226]. 
This would mean that if the accused is able to raise a reasonable 
doubt in the mind of the court that there exists a possibility of existence 
of such circumstances based on preponderance of probability, that 
would attract the exception as mentioned under the IPC, and if the 
said burden of proof is discharged by the accused, he would be 
entitled to such benefit of exception. 
30.	 It is also well settled that in order to discharge this burden of proof on 
any of the exceptions pleaded, it is not imperative for the accused to 
lead defence evidence. The court can also by taking into consideration 
the evidence available on record, which may have been presented 
by the prosecution, reach a conclusion that an exception is attracted 
in a given case, as observed by this Court in the case of James 
Martin v. State of Kerala, (2004) 2 SCC 203: 
“13…. Under Section 105 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
(in short “the Evidence Act”), the burden of proof is on 
the accused, who sets up the plea of self-defence, and, 
in the absence of proof, it is not possible for the court to 
presume the truth of the plea of self-defence. The court 
shall presume the absence of such circumstances. It is for 
the accused to place necessary material on record either by 
himself adducing positive evidence or by eliciting necessary 
facts from the witnesses examined for the prosecution. An 
accused taking the plea of the right of private defence is 
not necessarily required to call evidence; he can establish 
his plea by reference to circumstances transpiring from the 
prosecution evidence itself. The question in such a case 
would be a question of assessing the true effect of the 
prosecution evidence, and not a question of the accused 
discharging any burden.” 
31.	 To understand what exactly the burden of proof under Section 
105 of the Evidence Act is, we may refer to the landmark case of 
Dahyabhai Chhaganbhai Thakkar v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1964 
SC 1563, wherein it was observed that:
“7. The doctrine of burden of proof in the context of the plea 
of insanity may be stated in the following propositions : (1) 


--- PAGE 16 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1831
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
The prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt that 
the accused had committed the offence with the requisite 
mens rea, and the burden of proving that always rests on 
the prosecution from the beginning to the end of the trial. 
(2) There is a rebuttable presumption that the accused was 
not insane, when he committed the crime, in the sense 
laid down by Section 84 of the Indian Penal Code : the 
accused may rebut it by placing before the court all the 
relevant evidence oral, documentary or circumstantial, but 
the burden of proof upon him is no higher than that rests 
upon a party to civil proceedings. (3) Even if the accused 
was not able to establish conclusively that he was insane 
at the time he committed the offence, the evidence placed 
before the court by the accused or by the prosecution may 
raise a reasonable doubt in the mind of the court as regards 
one or more of the ingredients of the offence, including 
mens rea of the accused and in that case the court would 
be entitled to acquit the accused on the ground that the 
general burden of proof resting on the prosecution was 
not discharged.”
32.	 In the light of the above legal position, we may now examine the 
facts and circumstances as well as the evidence on record to 
consider whether the appellant was in fact suffering from insanity 
or was not in a proper state of mind during the commission of crime 
for the purpose of understanding whether she had the “intention” 
or whether she had knowingly and consciously committed the act 
without any excuse. 
33.	 The plea taken by the appellant during her examination by the Trial 
Court is that she came under the influence of certain invisible power 
when she committed the act. However, this plea does not appear 
to be a legally recognised exception as is the case of sudden and 
grave provocation, heat of passion, right of self-defence, etc. There 
is a difference between medical insanity and legal insanity. What 
Section 84 IPC provides is legal insanity as distinguished from 
medical insanity. A person is said to be of unsound mind on whom 
criminal liability cannot be fastened if at the time of commission of 
the act, he is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that 
what he was doing was either wrong or contrary to law. It may also 
be noted that the expression “unsoundness of mind” or the word 


--- PAGE 17 ---
1832
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“insanity” has not been defined in the Indian Penal Code, though 
these have been used interchangeably. In the absence of a precise 
definition of these terms, insanity or unsoundness of mind has 
been variously understood by courts in varying degrees of mental 
disorder and the courts have applied this attribute to give the benefit 
of doubt or otherwise, depending on the facts and circumstances 
of the cases. However, mere odd behaviour or certain physical or 
mental ailments affecting the emotions or capacity to think and act 
properly have not been construed to be “unsound mind” within the 
scope of Section 84 of the IPC. All kinds of insanity as are understood 
are not covered under Section 84 of IPC but only such acts, when 
committed by a person who was incapable of knowing the nature 
of the act or that he was doing which is either wrong or contrary to 
law are concerned. As a consequence, only such mental or medical 
condition which affects or disturbs the faculty of the person which 
renders him unable to know the nature of act committed or that he 
was doing which he did not know that it was wrong or contrary to 
law can be given the benefit of insanity under Section 84 IPC, and 
thus escape criminal liability. 
34.	 In the present case, it is noticed that apart from the plea taken by the 
appellant during her examination under Section 313 CrPC that she 
was under the influence of invisible power, no evidence has been 
brought on record by the appellant which would prove that she was 
of “unsound mind” within the meaning of Section 84 of IPC. 
35.	 Nevertheless, merely because the appellant could not convey 
herself in a legally understandable expression or idiom of her 
mental condition to indicate the existence of legal insanity or prove 
such a condition and provide evidence, in our opinion, such a plea 
could not have been completely ignored by the Trial Court or by 
the High Court.
36.	 In the peculiar facts and circumstances as revealed in the present 
case, and also keeping in mind that the incident happened in a rural 
setting and the appellant not being highly educated, the possibility 
of confusing her unstable mental condition or temporary lapse 
of judgmental power bordering on temporary insanity cannot be 
completely ruled out which the appellant attributed as coming under 
the influence of invisible power, for the purpose of giving a benefit 
of doubt about the non-existence of “intention”. 


--- PAGE 18 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1833
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
It is not common for rustic persons to be aware of various mental 
disorders/illnesses such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, that may 
temporarily impair the mental condition of an individual. More often 
than not, these disorders are unrecognised and remain untreated 
as it may be difficult to identify the symptoms and they do not seek 
proper and timely medical intervention, resulting in such medical/
mental conditions which can be misinterpreted or confused with spells 
or influence of invisible forces based on superstitions.
In the present case, we have also noted that no particulars have 
been mentioned about the nature of the “invisible influence” and as 
such it can be purely in the realm of speculation that this “invisible 
influence” may be a symptom of such mental conditions referred to 
above. However, in the light of the strange, bizarre and inexplicable 
behaviour of the appellant, there is no other plausible explanation 
that could be attached to her conduct in the given circumstances, 
other than to infer that she was under certain impaired mental 
condition which the appellant described as being under the influence 
of invisible power.
37.	 As per the testimony of Sonam Sahu (PW-1), on hearing the shout 
of the appellant, PW-1 went to the room to check, and she found 
the elder daughter of the appellant soaked in blood and saw the 
appellant hitting the younger daughter with the iron pounder. After the 
incident too, the appellant kept on shouting and crying that she had 
killed her daughters. This evidence stands substantially corroborated 
by the contemporaneous testimonies of the prosecution witnesses 
such as Rekha Sahu (PW- 2), Lakshman Prasad Mishra (PW-3), 
Ram Kumar Verma (PW-6), Pradeep Sahu (PW-7), Bhuniram Sahu 
(PW-8), Manuwa (PW-9), Namdev (PW-10) and Harish Kumar Sahu 
(PW-11). 
38.	 Further, when PW-1 left the appellant alone in the house and went 
to the adjacent house of her uncle to call for help, the appellant did 
not try to flee. In fact, as per the testimony of Sanat Kumar (PW-16), 
when he also reached the place of incident upon being informed by 
PW-1, he saw the appellant standing inside the room. 
39.	 It is true that in cases where direct evidence is available that links 
the accused to the offence, absence of proof of motive or intention 
does not preclude conviction of the accused. Perhaps it is for this 
reason that in the present case, the prosecution has not adduced 


--- PAGE 19 ---
1834
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
any evidence to prove any motive or intention behind the commission 
of crime. However, in cases where the plea taken by the accused is 
such that it raises a concern about the mental stability of the accused, 
the existence or lack of motive assumes great significance. This is 
especially true in cases involving grave offences such as murder, 
where a complete absence of any kind of motive which ordinarily 
impels a person to commit such a crime may lend credence to the 
plea of insanity, as in the present case, where a mother has taken 
the life of her own children of tender age apparently in absence of 
any motive. 
40.	 It is to be noted that the prosecution witnesses, including the husband 
of the appellant and other close relatives, as well as the residents 
of the village, have all acknowledged that the appellant loved her 
children very dearly. Testimonies and cross examination of prosecution 
witnesses such as Sonam Sahu (PW-1), Lakshman Prasad Mishra 
(PW-3), Tulsi Sahu (PW-4), Ram Kumar Verma (PW-6), Pradeep 
Sahu (PW-7), Kaushilya Bai (PW-15) and Sanat Kumar (PW-16) 
testify to this fact. 
41.	 As regards the relationship between the appellant and her husband, 
it was admitted by Sonam Sahu (PW-1) in her cross examination, 
that her brother loved his wife and children very much. 
42.	 Similarly, Pradeep Sahu (PW-7), husband of the appellant, denied the 
suggestion that he did not want to keep his wife. He also denied that 
he was unhappy because the appellant had given birth to daughters. 
It was also stated by him that the appellant was an Anganwadi worker 
and a day before the incident, she had gone for her duty, which 
suggests that they were leading a normal domestic life. 
43.	 None of the above witnesses has spoken ill of the appellant nor of 
any strained relationship of the appellant with her husband, other 
family members and children. In fact, PW-8, the father-in-law of the 
appellant though was not an eyewitness and not present at the time 
of the incident, refused to implicate the appellant of committing the 
aforesaid offence, clearly indicating the absence of any ill feeling 
towards his daughter in law, the appellant. 
In this background, absence of motive assumes great importance, 
which in turn would put a question mark on the presence of “intention” 
to commit the said act.


--- PAGE 20 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1835
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
44.	 Thus, the inference one can safely draw on the basis of the evidence 
on record is that the appellant had a cordial relationship with all 
the family members including her children which clearly indicates 
absence of any ill feelings on the part of the appellant to provide 
any basis for any motive to commit the crime which will prove the 
presence of “intention” to commit the act. 
45.	 There is yet another notable feature of the appellant’s behaviour. 
What had been consistently testified by the witnesses is that at the 
time of committing the crime and soon thereafter, she was crying 
and bemoaning the killing of her children. She thus clearly appears 
to have been overwhelmed by remorse. This is indicative of absence 
of any premeditation to commit the offence, but rather committing it 
in a spur of the moment by the appellant as an impulsive act, without 
realising the consequences of her act.
46.	 Reverting to the fundamental principles of criminal law, when a 
crime takes place in which there are eye-witnesses and the factum 
of homicide is proved by medical evidence, recovery of weapon of 
crime etc., the mens rea and the intention may be inferable, which 
of course is based on presumption. 
However, presumption of the existence of intention merely based 
on the act and result may not be safe in every case because the 
act and consequence of the questioned act may have been brought 
about by certain circumstances beyond the contemplation or control 
of the accused. Thus, when the court is called upon to ascertain the 
real intention or motive of the accused in committing the offence as 
in the present case when the accused pleaded that she was under 
the influence of invisible power indicating absence of intention, the 
court ought to have looked into all the surrounding circumstances 
before coming to the conclusion that the intention has been also 
proved beyond reasonable doubt.
47.	 Motive is usually the basis for causing the “intention” to commit 
any crime, but it is highly elusive and difficult to prove as it remains 
hidden in the deep recesses of the mind and is not comprehensible 
to others, unless disclosed by the perpetrator. Though under the 
law, it is absolutely not necessary that to prove an offence, motive 
is also required to be established if the intention or the mens rea 
can be safely inferred from the surrounding facts. But where the 
motive which can provide the basis for the intention appears to be 


--- PAGE 21 ---
1836
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
totally missing, the court has to be very circumspect in drawing the 
inference of the proof of the presence of intention. 
48.	 For committing a serious crime like homicide, there could be various 
motivating factors. One may commit the crime of homicide propelled 
by anger or motivated by insult, humiliation or jealousy. Other 
motivating factors may be to exact revenge or by way of retribution 
or to hide certain crimes already committed. One may also commit 
homicide to gain undue pecuniary benefit or otherwise. One may 
commit such a crime out of sheer frustration and dejection with 
life channelising through violent acts. One may commit such crime 
because of superstitious beliefs. 
There could be numerous factors, and it may not be possible to 
contemplate and mention all such situations that motivates a person 
to commit violent crime like homicide. While proof of motive of the 
crime may strengthen the prosecution’s case in proving the guilt 
of the offender, failure to prove motive is not fatal if the offence is 
otherwise proved through direct and incontrovertible evidence. At 
the same time, absence of any motive may benefit the accused 
under certain circumstances, for the ingredient of intention which 
constitutes the mens rea has also to be proved. 
49.	 In a case like the present one where the crime is committed by a 
mother, in her own house, members of the family could provide some 
clues to find out the motive for committing such a crime. 
Naturally, some of the questions which would arise in such a case 
may be as follows:
Did she kill her own children as she was fed up with her 
marital life? 
Was she subjected to any kind of mental or physical 
harassment at home which may have led to desperation 
to commit such a crime?
Was she unhappy with her husband or the children in 
any manner? 
Was there any financial or any such consideration that 
motivated her to commit such a crime?
Did she commit the crime at the instigation of any other 
person?


--- PAGE 22 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1837
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
Was it a case of propitiating some forces based on 
superstitious belief?
Was it a gruesome case of human sacrifice as had been 
judicially noticed in some rare cases? 
Was she suffering from any psychological or mental 
disorder that could have prompted her to commit such 
a crime?
As noticed above, there is nothing in the evidence on record to 
suggest the existence of any of the above situations. On the contrary, 
the evidence on record portrays her as a loving mother having a 
cordial relation with her husband and other family members, thus 
leading a normal family life. There is nothing in the evidence that is 
suggestive of any disturbed personal and domestic life. 
There can be no doubt that failure to unravel the true motivating 
factor for committing the crime cannot lead to the inference that the 
appellant is innocent in the light of the evidence which may be brought 
on record, yet the court should also not rush through to hold that the 
intention to commit the said offence has been proved in the light of 
the peculiar facts and circumstances obtaining in the present case. 
As noted above, the appellant had taken a plea that when she 
committed the offence, she was under the influence of some invisible 
power. However, in spite of the inability of the appellant to lead any 
cogent evidence or explain her aforesaid claim, in our opinion, this 
plea cannot be totally brushed aside in the peculiar facts emanating 
in the present case. 
50.	 In our view, the aforesaid plea ought to have been considered with 
utmost seriousness by the Trial Court as well as the High Court in 
the light of the facts and circumstances obtaining in the case. 
If there were no motivating factors at all which impelled the appellant 
to commit such a gruesome crime in a domestic environment which 
was otherwise normal in all respects, it is totally inexplicable and 
incomprehensible how a mother who loves her children and who had 
a cordial relation with her husband could resort to such a violent act 
and be attributed with the “intention to cause death” of her beloved 
children, except for coming under some influence or forces beyond 
her control as claimed by her. 


--- PAGE 23 ---
1838
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
It is generally accepted in every society, especially in Indian society 
that one of the most sacred relationships amongst all human 
relationships is that of a mother and child. A mother is the life giver 
as well as the nurturer of a child. Since time immemorial we have 
not only been hearing but also observing the essence of the lines 
“पूत कपूत सुने बहुतेरे, माता सुनी न कुमाता” which means that a son can be a bad 
son, but a mother can never be a bad mother. Of course, it cannot 
be a legal dictum that mothers can never be an offender but that in 
the present case, in complete absence of motive, a mother assaulting 
her children of tender ages to death, that too when it is admitted that 
there was no animosity, but only love for her children, is contrary to 
lived human experiences.
51.	 What we have also noted is that the State did not make any serious 
endeavour to try to ascertain the motive or the intention of the appellant 
during the investigation, in spite of all the witnesses portraying a very 
normal domestic environment in the family and the appellant to be a 
normal person which indicated absence of any factor which prompted 
the appellant to commit the crime. The investigating officer appears 
to have been satisfied in view of the evidence of PW-1 and other 
witnesses, recovery of the weapon and the medical evidence, that 
the appellant had committed the murder and there was no necessity 
to investigate the motive behind the said act. 
52.	 The Trial Court in its judgment though took note of the plea taken 
by the appellant that she was under the influence of invisible power 
when she was examined under Section 313 CrPC, did not give any 
importance to it and simply brushed it aside by observing that the 
evidence of the witnesses and other surrounding circumstances and 
her own admission proved that she committed the crime. The Trial 
Court unfortunately did not examine the said plea in all seriousness 
it deserved. In spite of being vested with enormous powers under 
the law to do complete justice, the Trial Court seems to have failed 
in exercising the same to reach a logical conclusion. 
53.	 In the present case, apart from the plea taken by the appellant in 
her examination under Section 313 CrPC, the fact of the possibility 
of the appellant not being in a stable mental condition came up in 
the statement of Santram Sahu (PW-5) recorded under Section 161 
CrPC, who is the father-in-law of the appellant. It was recorded 
therein that 15 days prior to the incident, the appellant was babbling 


--- PAGE 24 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1839
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
nonsense, saying that she is Mata, Budi Dai etc. Further, it was 
also mentioned that the appellant was taken to the Psychiatrist at 
Government Hospital, Durg where she was given medicine and was 
advised to follow up. This statement of PW-5 made under Section 161 
CrPC was sought to be produced by the appellant in her defence 
before the Trial Court. 
54.	 Even though the statements recorded under Section 161 of CrPC 
cannot be used for any purposes in a trial due to the embargo placed 
under Section 162 CrPC, however, the power of the Trial Court under 
Section 165 Evidence Act is wide enough to put questions based on 
the statement under Section 161 CrPC to any witness or party at 
any stage to secure the ends of justice. For this, we may profitably 
refer to the judgment of this Court in Raghunandan v. State of U.P., 
(1974) 4 SCC 186, wherein, it was observed as follows: 
“14. It is true that the ban, imposed by Section 162, 
Criminal Procedure Code, against the use of a statement 
of a witness recorded by the police during investigation, 
appears sweeping and wide. But, at the same time, we 
find that the powers of the Court, under Section 165 of 
the Evidence Act, to put any question to a witness, are 
also couched in very wide terms authorising the Judge 
“in order to discover or to obtain proper proof of relevant 
facts” to “ask any question he pleases, in any form, at 
any time, of any witness, or of the parties, about any fact 
relevant or irrelevant”. The first proviso to Section 165, 
Evidence Act, enacting that, despite the powers of the 
Court to put any question to a witness, the judgment must 
be based upon facts declared by the Act to be relevant, 
only serves to emphasize the width of the power of the 
Court to question a witness. The second proviso in this 
section preserves the privileges of witnesses to refuse 
to answer certain questions and prohibits only questions 
which would be considered improper under Sections 148 
and 149 of the Evidence Act. Statements of witnesses made 
to the police during the investigation do not fall under any 
prohibited category mentioned in Section 165, Evidence 
Act. If Section 162 of the Criminal Procedure Code, was 
meant to be so wide in its sweep as the trial court thought 
it to be, it would make a further inroad upon the powers of 


--- PAGE 25 ---
1840
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the Judge to put questions under Section 165, Evidence 
Act. If that was the correct position, at least Section 162, 
Criminal Procedure Code, would have said so explicitly. 
Section 165 of the Evidence Act was already there when 
Section 162, Criminal Procedure Code was enacted.
15. It is certainly quite arguable that Section 162, Criminal 
Procedure Code, does amount to a prohibition against the 
use even by the Court of statements mentioned there. 
Nevertheless, the purpose of the prohibition of Section 162 
of the Criminal Procedure Code, being to prevent unfair 
use by the prosecution of statements made by witnesses 
to the police during the course of investigation, while 
the proviso is intended for the benefit of the defence, it 
could also be urged that, in order to secure the ends of 
justice, which all procedural law is meant to subserve, 
the prohibition, by taking into account its purpose and the 
mischief it was designed to prevent as well as its context, 
must be confined in its scope to the use by parties only 
to a proceeding of statements mentioned there.
16. We are inclined to accept the argument of the appellant 
that the language of Section 162, Criminal Procedure 
Code, though wide, is not explicit or specific enough to 
extend the prohibition to the use of the wide and special 
powers of the Court to question a witness, expressly and 
explicitly given by Section 165 of the Indian Evidence 
Act in order to secure the ends of justice. We think that a 
narrow and restrictive construction put upon the prohibition 
in Section 162, Criminal Procedure Code, so as to confine 
the ambit of it to the use of statements by witnesses by 
parties only to a proceeding before the Court, would 
reconcile or harmonize the two provisions considered 
by us and also serve the ends of justice. Therefore, we 
hold that Section 162, Criminal Procedure Code, does 
not impair the special powers of the Court under Section 
165, Indian Evidence Act…..”
55.	 This power of the Court to invoke Section 165 of the Evidence Act 
to examine witnesses to subserve the cause of justice and public 
interest has been reiterated in Sidhartha Vashisht v. State (NCT 
of Delhi), (2010) 6 SCC 1, wherein it was observed as follows: 


--- PAGE 26 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1841
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
188. It is also important to note the active role which is to be 
played by a court in a criminal trial. The court must ensure 
that the Prosecutor is doing his duties to the utmost level 
of efficiency and fair play. This Court, in Zahira Habibulla 
H. Sheikh v. State of Gujarat [(2004) 4 SCC 158 : 2004 
SCC (Cri) 999] , has noted the daunting task of a court in 
a criminal trial while noting the most pertinent provisions 
of the law. It is useful to reproduce the passage in full : 
(SCC pp. 188-91, paras 43-49)
“43. The courts have to take a participatory role in a trial. 
They are not expected to be tape recorders to record 
whatever is being stated by the witnesses. Section 311 
of the Code and Section 165 of the Evidence Act confer 
vast and wide powers on Presiding Officers of court to 
elicit all necessary materials by playing an active role in 
the evidence-collecting process. They have to monitor the 
proceedings in aid of justice in a manner that something, 
which is not relevant, is not unnecessarily brought into 
record. Even if the prosecutor is remiss in some ways, it 
can control the proceedings effectively so that the ultimate 
objective i.e. truth is arrived at. This becomes more 
necessary before the court has reasons to believe that the 
prosecuting agency or the prosecutor is not acting in the 
requisite manner. The court cannot afford to be wishfully or 
pretend to be blissfully ignorant or oblivious to such serious 
pitfalls or dereliction of duty on the part of the prosecuting 
agency. The prosecutor who does not act fairly and acts 
more like a counsel for the defence is a liability to the fair 
judicial system, and courts could not also play into the 
hands of such prosecuting agency showing indifference 
or adopting an attitude of total aloofness.
44.The power of the court under Section 165 of the 
Evidence Act is in a way complementary to its power 
under Section 311 of the Code. The section consists 
of two parts i.e. : (i) giving a discretion to the court to 
examine the witness at any stage, and (ii) the mandatory 
portion which compels the court to examine a witness if 
his evidence appears to be essential to the just decision 
of the court. Though the discretion given to the court is 


--- PAGE 27 ---
1842
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
very wide, the very width requires a corresponding caution. 
In Mohanlal Shamji Soni v. Union of India [1991 Supp (1) 
SCC 271 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 595] this Court has observed, 
while considering the scope and ambit of Section 311, 
that the very usage of the words such as, ‘any court’, ‘at 
any stage’, or ‘any enquiry or trial or other proceedings’, 
‘any person’ and ‘any such person’ clearly spells out 
that the section has expressed in the widest possible 
terms and do not limit the discretion of the court in any 
way. However, as noted above, the very width requires 
a corresponding caution that the discretionary powers 
should be invoked as the exigencies of justice require and 
exercised judicially with circumspection and consistently 
with the provisions of the Code. The second part of 
the section does not allow any discretion but obligates 
and binds the court to take necessary steps if the fresh 
evidence to be obtained is essential to the just decision 
of the case, ‘essential’ to an active and alert mind and 
not to one which is bent to abandon or abdicate. Object 
of the section is to enable the court to arrive at the truth 
irrespective of the fact that the prosecution or the defence 
has failed to produce some evidence which is necessary 
for a just and proper disposal of the case. The power is 
exercised and the evidence is examined neither to help 
the prosecution nor the defence, if the court feels that 
there is necessity to act in terms of Section 311 but only 
to subserve the cause of justice and public interest. It is 
done with an object of getting the evidence in aid of a 
just decision and to uphold the truth.
56.	 In the light of the above legal position, we are of the opinion that 
the Trial Court ought to have taken into consideration the peculiar 
circumstances of the case and the statement of PW-5 recorded 
under Section 161 CrPC to put right questions to the parties and 
witnesses to ascertain the motive or intention of the appellant in 
committing the crime. 
The High Court, while exercising appellate jurisdiction also did not 
even make any reference to it, though took into consideration the 
statement made under Section 313 CrPC.


--- PAGE 28 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1843
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
57.	 Under the circumstances, in our opinion, in view of the plea taken 
by the appellant that she was under the influence of some invisible 
power during commission of crime, a reasonable doubt can be said 
to have arisen as regards existence of intention, thus of mens rea 
for causing death in the present case. 
In arriving at this conclusion, we have taken into consideration the 
following aspects: 
(i)	
During the commission of crime, the appellant was shouting 
that she is killing her children; 
(ii)	
Post the incident, the appellant, on being asked the 
reason behind her act, kept on crying and repeating that 
she has killed her children. This is corroborated by other 
prosecution witnesses as well; 
(iii)	 The appellant did not try to flee the scene of crime even 
after being left alone in the house by PW-1; 
(iv)	 Complete absence of motive behind the commission of 
crime in background of the fact that the appellant loved 
her children very much, as also acknowledged by the 
prosecution witness; 
(v)	
The nature of relation between the accused and the 
deceased i.e., of a mother and child. 
(vi)	 Absence of any strained domestic relationships or any 
such motivating factor discussed above in para 49.
58.	 However, in spite of the above discussed circumstances and other 
evidence on record, in the absence of any conclusive medical 
evidence with regards to the mental condition of the appellant, we 
are of the opinion that it may not be enough to extend the benefit 
of exception as encapsulated in Section 84 IPC so as to acquit the 
appellant in the present case. 
Nevertheless, in our view, the circumstances are enough to cast a 
shadow of doubt about the existence of the intention of the appellant 
to commit the crime in the present case. We are, thus, satisfied that 
in the present case “intention of causing death” cannot be said to 
have proved. 


--- PAGE 29 ---
1844
[2025] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
59.	 Under the circumstances, applying the practical tests elucidated in 
State of A.P. v. Rayavarapu Punnayya (supra) and Rampal Singh v. 
State of U.P. (supra) it can be said that the present case falls within 
the third category of “culpable homicide of the third degree” as the 
act was committed by the appellant without the intention of causing 
death, and the said culpable homicide would be covered under 
Part II of Section 304 IPC. 
60.	 Accordingly, we convert the conviction of the appellant under Part II 
of Section 304 IPC from that of Section 302 IPC under which she 
was initially convicted and sentenced by the Trial Court which was 
upheld by the High Court. 
61.	 It has been brought to our notice that the appellant has already 
undergone 9 (nine) years 10 (ten) months of custody. Part II of 
Section 304 IPC provides for punishment with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 10 (ten) years or with 
fine or with both. 
Upon her conviction under Part II of Section 304 IPC as above, as 
she has already undergone more than 9 (nine) years and 10 (ten) 
months of sentence, we sentence the appellant to the period already 
undertaken by her without any fine. 
Accordingly, she shall be entitled to be released forthwith, which 
we direct so.
62.	 The appeal is, accordingly, partly allowed as above.
63.	 Before we part with this appeal, we would like to make certain 
observations which in our opinion the trial courts should keep in mind 
while dealing with such plea taken by an accused, especially when 
it relates to homicide, that the accused was under the influence of 
certain invisible force or where the prosecution is also totally unable 
to explain circumstances which motivated him or her to commit the 
act of homicide or where the evidence on record unambiguously 
show totally inexplicable but highly intriguing, strange and unusual 
circumstances under which the crime was committed as happened 
in the present case. 
64.	 If such circumstances emerge in course of the trial which remain 
inexplicable and bizarre as in the present case, the court, in our 
opinion, even if the accused opts to remain silent, should ask such 
questions to the witnesses, as may be necessary to elicit the truth 


--- PAGE 30 ---
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
1845
Chunni Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh
by invoking Section 165 of the Evidence Act, since the court has 
to be satisfied that the offence alleged has been proved beyond 
reasonable doubt not only in respect of actus reas but also mens rea. 
This assumes great importance when the accused pleads existence 
of certain circumstances which are beyond his/her control and which 
may indicate unsoundness of mind even temporarily, incapacitating 
the accused to take a conscious and informed decision. 
It is for the salutary reason that if the accused at the time of 
commission of crime was incapable of making conscious and 
informed decision or was suffering from certain mental incapacity 
or unsoundness of mind even if temporarily, it may put a question 
mark on the “intention” of the accused in committing such a crime, 
in which event, the benefit of doubt may be extended to the accused 
as regards proof of intention and mens rea, as it would determine 
the nature of conviction and sentence which may be imposed. 
Result of the case: Appeal partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
