--- PAGE 1 ---
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 869 : 2025 INSC 90
Vijay @ Vijayakumar 
v. 
State Represented by Inspector of Police
(Criminal Appeal No. 1049 of 2021)
16 January 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the appellant's act of causing the death of the deceased 
fell within the scope of "grave and sudden provocation" under 
Exception  1 to Section 300 of the Penal Code (IPC), thereby 
reducing the offence from murder to culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder under Section 304 Part I IPC.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – Prerequisite to attract application of 
Exception 1 to Section 300 IPC:
Held: Not each and every provocation, that results in loss of self-
control by accused, will convert an offence of murder to culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder – Only when the provocation 
is both “grave and sudden” will the accused be entitled to claim 
benefit of Exception 1 to Section 300, IPC – If either the gravity 
or suddenness is absent, the provocation will not reduce murder 
to culpable homicide not amounting to murder. [Para 18 - 20]
Penal Code, 1860 – Ingredients of Exception 1 to Section 300, 
IPC – Discussed:
Held: There are three core ingredients of Exception 1 to Section 300 
IPC: (i) sudden (i.e., ‘unexpected’ and interval between provocation 
and homicide being ‘brief’) and grave (to be determined applying 
“reasonable man test”) provocation; (ii) provocation caused 
accused to lose his power of self-control; and (iii) being deprived 
of his power of self-control, accused caused death of the victim – 
Reliance placed on Mancini v. Director of Public Prosecutions, 
1942 A. C. 1 [Paras 21 - 24]
Without disturbing the findings of decisions of both the courts below, 
the courts below could have invoked Exception 4 of Section 300, 
IPC if they intended to bring the present case within the ambit of 
culpable homicide not amounting to murder – Because as revealed 


--- PAGE 2 ---
870
[2025] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
from the facts, deceased abused and slapped Appellant (who 
was accompanied by his friends) which led to an altercation and 
Appellant hit deceased with a cement brick lying nearby – However, 
deceased’s death was neither pre-planned nor pre-meditated 
and the accused was also unarmed – This proved that Appellant 
did not take any undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual 
manner – The conviction is affirmed but the sentence is reduced 
to period already undergone. [Paras 29 - 35]
Case Law Cited
Mancini v. Director of Public Prosecutions, 1942 A. C. 1 – relied on.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Evidence 
Act, 1872.
List of Keywords
Sudden and grave; Provocation; Culpable homicide not amounting 
to murder; Section 300, IPC; Exception 1 to Section 300, IPC; 
Exception 4 to Section, 300 IPC; Pre-meditated; Pre-planned; 
Cruel manner; Advantage; Self-control.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1049 of 2021
From the judgment and order dated 27.06.2019 of the High Court 
of judicature at Madras in CRLA No. 194 of 2012
Appearances for Parties
M.P. Parthiban, Adv. for the Appellant.
D. Kumanan, Ms. Deepa S., Sheikh F. Kalia, Veshal Tyagi, Chinmay 
Anand, Shagufa Khan, Advs. for the Respondent.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
This appeal arises from the Judgment and Order passed by the High 
Court of Madras dated 27-6-2019 in Criminal Appeal No.194/2012 by 


--- PAGE 3 ---
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
871
Vijay @ Vijayakumar v. State Represented by Inspector of Police
which the High Court dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant – 
herein and thereby affirmed the Judgment and Order passed by 
the Trial Court, i.e., Sessions Judge, Nagapattinam holding the 
appellant – herein guilty of the offence punishable under Section 
304 Part 1 of the Indian Penal Code (hereafter, referred to as “IPC”) 
and sentencing him to undergo 5 years of rigorous imprisonment. 
It appears that the appellant was also held guilty of the offence 
punishable under Section 201 of IPC and was sentenced to undergo 
2 years of rigorous imprisonment.
2.	
The case of the prosecution in brief is as under:-
3.	
The appellant – herein along with his friends including 'PW 11' 
and 'PW 12' had gone to watch a movie on 5-11-2007. They were 
returning home in the mid night hours after watching the movie. While 
they were sleeping beneath a bridge, they found the deceased over 
there to be in an inebriated condition. It seems that the deceased 
was heavily drunk. The deceased picked up an altercation with the 
appellant – herein and his friends. According to the prosecution, at 
that point of time, the appellant picked up a cement brick which was 
lying at the place of occurrence and hit the deceased on his head. 
The deceased succumbed to the head injuries.
4.	
It is also the case of the prosecution that thereafter with a view to 
destroy the evidence, the appellant – herein set the dead-body of 
the deceased on fire.
5.	
The 'PW 1' in his capacity as the Village Administrative Officer 
lodged a First Information Report in this regard at the concerned 
Police Station.
6.	
The inquest panchnama of the dead-body was carried out. Thereafter, 
the dead-body was sent for postmortem. The Postmortem Report 
reveals that the cause of death was due to head injuries.
7.	
At the end of the investigation, the Police filed charge-sheet. The 
case came to be committed to the Court of Sessions under Section 
209 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereafter, referred to 
as “Code”).
8.	
The Trial Court framed charge against the appellant – herein for 
the offence enumerated above to which he pleaded not guilty and 
claimed to be tried.


--- PAGE 4 ---
872
[2025] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
9.	
In the course of the trial, the prosecution examined the following 
witnesses:-
P.W.1.
Thiru Mohan, Village Administrative Officer
P.W.2
Tmt Rani
P.W.3
Tmt Vanitha
P.W.4
Tmt Kavitha
P.W.5
Dr M.S. Kadar
P.W.6
Tmt Gayathri, Scientific Assistant
P.W.7
Thiru Mohandoss
P.W.8
Thiru Srinivasan
P.W.9
Thiru Samarasapandiyan, Head Constable
P.W.10
Thiru Rajasekar, Inspector of Police
P.W.11
Thiru Ramu
P.W.12
Tmt Raji
10.	 The prosecution also relied upon the following pieces of documentary 
evidence:-
Ex.P.1
06.11.2007
Complaint given by Village 
Administrative Officer.
Ex.P.2
12.11.2007
Signature of P.W.1 in Statement of 
Accused.
Ex.P.3
12.11.2007
Signature of report by Village 
Administrative Officer.
Ex.P.4
28.11.2007
Viscera Report.
Ex.P.5
06.11.2007
Post Mortem Certificate.
Ex.P.6
06.11.2007
Signature of P.W.7 in Observation 
Mahazar.
Ex.P.7
06.11.2007
Signature of P.W.7 in Mahazar.
Ex.P.8
06.11.2007
Signature of P.W.8 in Observation 
Mahazar.
Ex.P.9
06.11.2007
Signature of P.W.9 in Mahazar.
Ex.P.10
06.11.2007
Printed F.I.R.


--- PAGE 5 ---
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
873
Vijay @ Vijayakumar v. State Represented by Inspector of Police
Ex.P.11
06.11.2007
Observation Mahazar
Ex.P.12
06.11.2007
Rough Sketch.
ΕX.Ρ.13
06.11.2007
Mahazar.
Ex.P.14
06.11.2007
Inquest Report.
EX.P.15
06.11.2007
Special report for recovery of M.0.8.
Ex.P.16
12.11.2007
Accused Statement by Village 
Administrative
Ex.P.17
12.11.2007
V.A.O. report.
Ex. P.18
12.11.2007
Admissible Portion in Confession 
Statement
Ex.P.19
12.11.2007
Mahazar for recovery of M.O.1,2 
and 9.
Ex.P.20
12.11.2007
Alteration Report.
Ex.P.21
13.11.2007
Requisition for Chemical 
Examination
Ex.P.22
14.11.2007
Court Letter for Chemical 
Examination.
Ex.P.23
28.11.2007
Biology Report.
Ex.P.24
28.02.2008
Serology Report
11.	 On conclusion of the recording of the oral evidence, the further 
statement of the appellant – herein was recorded by the Magistrate 
under Section 313 of the Code, in which the appellant claimed 
himself to be innocent.
12.	 Upon appreciation of the oral as well as documentary evidence, the 
Trial Court took the view that the case is one of culpable homicide 
not amounting to murder. The Trial Court thought fit to give to the 
appellant herein the benefit of Exception 1 of the Section 300 IPC on 
the ground that the case was one of grave and sudden provocation 
and, accordingly, held the appellant – herein guilty of the offence 
punishable under Section 304 (Part 1) of IPC and sentenced him 
to undergo 5 years of R.I. and fine.
13.	 The appellant went in appeal before the High Court. His appeal failed 
before the High Court. The High Court affirmed the Judgment and 
Order of conviction passed by the Trial Court.


--- PAGE 6 ---
874
[2025] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
14.	 In such circumstances, the appellant is here before this Court with 
the present appeal.
15.	 We have heard Mr. Shreyas Kaushal, the learned counsel appearing 
for the appellant and Mr. D. Kumanan, the learned counsel appearing 
for the State of Tamil Nadu.
16.	 We take notice of the fact that the appellant – herein has undergone 
4 years of imprisonment. The incident is of the year 2007.
17.	 We have our own views in so far as applicability of Exception 1 of 
Section 300 IPC is concerned. However, the State is not in appeal 
before us.
18.	 Exception one of Section 300 states that a culpable homicide is not 
murder if the offender, whilst deprived of the power of self-control 
by grave and sudden provocation, causes death of the person who 
gave the provocation or causes the death of any other person by 
mistake or accident.
19.	 It is well established that Exception 1 to Section 300 can apply when 
the accused is shown to have deprived of power of self- control by 
grave and sudden provocation which is caused by the person whose 
death has been caused.
20.	 It is not each and every provocation that will reduce the crime from 
murder to culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The provocation 
must be both grave and sudden. In order to invoke the benefit of 
the exception, it must be established that the act committed by the 
accused was a simultaneous reaction of grave as well as sudden 
provocation which deprived him of the power of self-control. If the 
provocation is grave but not sudden, the accused cannot get the 
benefit of this exception. Likewise, he cannot invoke the exception 
where the provocation though sudden is not grave.
21.	 In Mancini v. Director of Public Prosecutions reported in 1942 A.C. 1, 
Viscount Simon observed:
“It is not all provocation that will reduce the crime of murder 
to manslaughter. Provocation, to have that result, must be 
such as temporarily deprives the person provoked of the 
power of self control, as the result of which he commits the 
unlawful act which causes death. “In deciding the question 
whether this was or was not the case, regard must be 


--- PAGE 7 ---
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
875
Vijay @ Vijayakumar v. State Represented by Inspector of Police
had to the nature of the act by which the offender causes 
death, to the time which elapsed between the provocation 
and the act which caused death, to the offender's conduct 
during that interval, and to all other circumstances tending 
to show the state of his mind”: Stephen's Digest of the 
Criminal Law, art. 317. The test to be applied is that of the 
effect of the provocation on a reasonable man, as was laid 
down by the Court of Criminal Appeal in Rex v. Lesbini 7, 
so that an unusually excitable or pugnacious individual is 
not entitled to rely on provocation which would not have 
led an ordinary person to act as he did. In applying the 
test, it is of particular importance (a) to consider whether 
a sufficient interval has elapsed since the provocation 
to allow a reasonable man time to cool, and (b) to take 
into account the instrument with which the homicide was 
effected, for to retort, in the heat of passion induced by 
provocation, by a simple blow, is a very different thing 
from making use of a deadly instrument like a concealed 
dagger. In short, the mode of resentment must bear a 
reasonable relationship to the provocation if the offence 
is to be reduced to manslaughter”
22.	 In order to bring the case within Exception 1, the following conditions 
must be complied with:
(i)	
The deceased must have given provocation to the accused; 
(ii)	
The provocation must be grave;
(iii)	 The provocation must be sudden;
(iv)	 The offender, by reason of the side provocation, shall have 
been deprived of his power of self-control;
(v)	
He should have killed the deceased during the continuance 
of the deprivation of the power of self-control; and
(vi)	 The offender must have caused the death of the person 
who gave the provocation or that of any other person by 
mistake or accident.
23.	 In other words, before Exception 1 can be invoke, the accused must 
establish the following circumstances:


--- PAGE 8 ---
876
[2025] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(i)	
there was a provocation which was both grave and sudden;
(ii)	
such provocation had deprived the accused of his power 
of self-control; and
(iii)	 whilst the accused was so deprived of his power of self-
control, he had caused the death of the victim.
24.	 In order to bring his case under Exception 1 to Section 300 IPC the 
following ingredients:
(i) The provocation was sudden; (ii) the provocation was 
grave; and (iii) loss of self-control. These three ingredients 
may be considered one by one:
(i) Whether the provocation was sudden or not does not 
present much difficulty. The word ‘sudden’ involves two 
elements. First, the provocation must be unexpected. If an 
accused plans in advance to receive a provocation in order 
to justify the subsequent homicide, the provocation cannot 
be said to be sudden. Secondly, the interval between the 
provocation and the homicide should be brief. If the man 
giving the provocation is killed within a minute after the 
provocation, it is a case of sudden provocation. If the man 
is killed six hours after the provocation, it is not a case of 
sudden provocation.
(ii) the main difficulty lies in deciding whether a certain 
provocation was grave or not. A bare statement by the 
accused that he regarded the provocation as grave will 
not be accepted by the court. The court has to apply an 
objective test for deciding whether the provocation was 
grave or not. A good test for deciding whether a certain 
provocation was grave or not is this: “Is a reasonable man 
likely to lose self-control as a result of such provocation?” 
If the answer is in the affirmative, the provocation will be 
classed as grave. If the answer is in the negative, the 
provocation is not grave. In this context, the expression 
‘reasonable man’ means a normal or an average person. 
A reasonable man is not the ideal man or the perfect 
being. A normal man sometimes loses temper. There is, 
therefore no inconsistency in saying that, a reasonable 
man may lose self-control as a result of grave provocation. 


--- PAGE 9 ---
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
877
Vijay @ Vijayakumar v. State Represented by Inspector of Police
A reasonable or normal or average man is a legal fiction. 
The reasonable man will vary from society to society. A 
Judge should not impose his personal standards in this 
matter. By training, a Judge is a patient man. But the 
reasonable man or the normal man need not have the 
same standard of behaviour as the judge himself. The 
reasonable man under consideration is a member of the 
society, in which the accused was living. So, education 
and social conditions of the accused are relevant factors. 
An ordinary exchange of abuse is a matter of common 
occurrence. A reasonable man does not lose self-control 
merely on account of an ordinary exchange of abuses. 
So, courts do not treat an ordinary exchange of abuses 
as a basis for grave provocation. On the other hand, in 
most societies, adultery is looked upon as a very serious 
matter. So, quotes are prepared to treat adultery as a 
basis for grave provocation.
(iii) the question of loss of self-control comes up indirectly 
in deciding whether a particular provocation was grave 
or not. So, if it is proved that the accused did receive 
grave and sudden provocation, the court is generally 
prepared to assume that homicide was committed while 
the accused was deprived of the power of self-control. 
In some cases, it may be possible for the prosecution 
to prove that the accused committed the murder with a 
cool head in spite of grave provocation. But such cases 
will be rare. So, when the accused has established grave 
and sudden provocation, the court will generally hold that 
he has discharged the burden that lay upon him under 
Exception 1 to Section 300 IPC.
25.	 What should be the approach of the court? The provocation must 
be such as will upset not merely a hasty and hot-tempered or 
hypersensitive person, but one of ordinary sense and calmness. 
The Court has to consider whether a reasonable person placed in 
the same position as accused would have behaved in the manner 
in which the accused behaved on receiving the same provocation. 
If it appears that the action of the accused was out of all proportion 
to the gravity or magnitude of the provocation offered, the case 
will not fall under the exception. The case can only fall under the 


--- PAGE 10 ---
878
[2025] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
exception when the court is able to hold that provided the alleged 
provocation is given, every normal person would behave or act in 
the same way as the accused in the circumstances in which the 
accused was placed, acted.
26.	 In the words of Viscount Simon: "The whole doctrine relating to 
provocation depends on the fact that it causes, or may cause, a 
sudden and temporary loss of self-control, whereby malice, which is 
the formation of an intention to kill or to inflict grievous bodily harm, is 
negatived. Consequently, where the provocation inspires and actual 
intention to kill, or to inflict grievous bodily harm the doctrine that 
provocation may reduce murder to manslaughter seldom applies".
27.	 Section 105 of the India Evidence Act, 1872 casts burden of proof 
on the accused. Being an exception, the burden of proving the 
circumstances covered by Exception 1 is on the accused. Where 
the prosecution prima facie proves that the act was committed by 
the accused which had resulted in the death of the deceased and 
the accused pleads that the case falls within one of the exceptions, 
it is for him to prove that.
28.	 It is for the accused who seeks to reduce the nature of his crime by 
bringing his case under Exception 1, to prove that the provocation 
received by him was such as might reasonably be deemed sufficient 
to deprive him of self- control, and that the act of killing took place 
whilst that absence of control was in existence and may fairly 
be attributed to it. (Ref.:Ratanlal and Dhirajlal’s Law of Crimes, 
24th Edition)
29.	 If at all, the Trial Court and the High Court wanted to bring the case 
within the ambit of culpable homicide not amounting to murder, then 
it could have invoked exception 4 of Section 300 of the IPC. We say 
so because the incident was not pre-planned or pre-meditated. The 
appellant and his friends had gone to watch a movie. They were 
returning back home in the late night hours. It appears that after the 
movie was over and while returning, they decided to take some rest 
beneath the bridge. The deceased also happened to be sleeping 
beneath the bridge. However, it is the case of the prosecution that 
the deceased was in a drunken condition. In fact, there is nothing to 
indicate that the deceased was drunk. However, the eye-witnesses to 
the incident and that too none other then the friends of the appellant 
who were examined by the prosecution deposed that the deceased 
was in a drunken condition.


--- PAGE 11 ---
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
879
Vijay @ Vijayakumar v. State Represented by Inspector of Police
30.	 The deceased is said to have uttered some bad words and it appears 
that he also raised his hand & slapped the appellant herein. However, 
that by itself may not be sufficient to bring the case within the ambit 
of grave and sudden provocation.
31.	 The incident occurred at a spur of a moment. The act was not 
pre-planned or pre-meditated. What is important to note is that the 
appellant had no weapon in his hands. He picked up a cement stone 
which was lying beneath the bridge and hit the same on the head of 
the deceased. Therefore, it could be said that the appellant did not 
take any undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.
32.	 Be that as it may, we are not inclined to disturb the conviction of 
the appellant – herein.
33.	 We are of the view that the ends of justice would be met if the 
sentence imposed by the Trial Court and affirmed by the High Court 
is reduced to the period already undergone.
34.	 The appeal stands partly allowed. While upholding the conviction, 
we reduce the sentence to the period already undergone.
35.	 Pending applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Niti Richhariya, Hony. Associate Editor 
(Verified by: Liz Mathew, Sr. Adv.)
