--- PAGE 1 ---
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 139 : 2025 INSC 777
Sakhawat and Anr. 
v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh
(Criminal Appeal No. 4571 of 2024)
23 May 2025
[Abhay S. Oka* and Augustine George Masih, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to the correctness of the order passed by the High 
Court upholding the conviction of the appellants under various 
sections of Penal Code, 1860, when the prosecution failed to 
conduct fair investigation and had suppressed affidavits of the 
eyewitnesses.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.34, 302, 307 – Murder – Failure to carry 
fair investigation – Appellants-accused convicted for murder 
of deceased and sentenced to life imprisonment whereas 
acquittal of accused no.1 – Bail applications by appellants – 
Sessions court relied on the affidavits of two eye-witnesses 
and granted bail – High Court upheld the order of the trial 
court – Correctness:
Held: Three out of four eyewitnesses admittedly filed the affidavits 
during the bail hearing of the accused, stating that the accused not 
involved – Investigating Officer did not controvert the affidavits by 
filing a counter-affidavit, though time was granted to him – Thus, 
by failing to carry out further investigation on the basis of affidavits, 
the prosecution failed to carry out a fair investigation – Moreover, 
prosecution tried to suppress the affidavits – Serious doubt 
created about the truthfulness of the versions of three prosecution 
witnesses-eye witnesses before the Court – As the prosecution 
did not conduct a fair investigation and suppressed important 
material in the form of affidavits of the prosecution witnesses-eye 
witnesses, unsafe to convict the appellants only on the basis of the 
testimony of the informant – Failure to conduct further investigation 
* Author


--- PAGE 2 ---
140
[2025] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
based on the affidavits goes to the root of the matter – Failure 
to recover the weapons of offence also relevant – Failure on the 
part of the High Court and the Session Court to consider the 
cross-examination of Investigating Officer and the suppression of 
the affidavits by the prosecution – High Court overlooked these 
highly relevant aspects – Thus, the impugned judgment set aside 
and the appellants acquitted of the offences alleged against them. 
[Paras 20-24, 26]
Practice and procedure – Record of trial court not to be referred 
as “lower court record” – Reiteration of the direction issued 
by this Court – Describing any Court as a “Lower Court” 
against the ethos of our Constitution – High Courts to take 
note of the said direction and act upon the same. [Para 25]
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Murder; Life imprisonment; Injured witness; Material prosecution 
witnesses; Fair trial; Affidavits in favour of accused; Supplementary 
statements of witnesses; Counter-affidavit; Failure to carry out 
fair investigation; Suppression of important material; Failure to  
recover weapons; Lower court; Lower court record; Ethos of 
Constitution.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
4571 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 09.10.2018 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in CRLA No. 2670 of 1982
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Manoj Prasad, Sr. Adv., Vikrant Singh Bais.
Advs. for the Respondents:
K Parameshwar, Sr. A.A.G., Sudeep Kumar, Ms. Kanti,  
Ms. Manisha, Ms. Rupali.


--- PAGE 3 ---
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
141
Sakhawat and Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Abhay S. Oka, J.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
1.	
This appeal has been filed against the judgment dated 9th October, 
2018 of the High Court of Allahabad. The impugned judgment 
upheld the conviction of the appellant nos. 1 and 2 for the offences 
punishable under Section 302 and Section 307 read with Section 34 
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’). Both of them 
were sentenced to suffer life imprisonment. 
2.	
First Information Report (for short, ‘the FIR’) dated 5th May, 1981 was 
registered against the accused no. 1 (Abrar), appellant no. 1/accused 
no. 2 (Sakhawat) and appellant no. 2/accused no. 3 (Mehndi) for the 
aforementioned offences. The case of the prosecution is that PW-4 
(Amir Hussain) was sleeping under a Babool tree, and the deceased 
(Sukha) was sleeping in his hut. On the intervening night of 4th/5th 
May, 1981, PW-4 (Amir Hussain) woke up at 2 a.m. to the sound of 
a firearm being shot. PW-5 (Allah Baksh) and PW-6 (Mohd. Hanif) 
also arrived at the scene where they heard a voice from the hut of 
the deceased (Sukha) and a firearm shot. They saw appellant no. 1 
armed with a country-made pistol, appellant no. 2 armed with a knife, 
and accused no. 1 armed with a danda. The accused allegedly had 
a scuffle with the deceased and PW-7 (Nanhi), who were allegedly 
in an illicit relationship. Appellant no. 2 inflicted an injury to the neck 
of PW-7 using his knife. The accused fled and the deceased was 
found trembling on account of injuries near his hut, and eventually 
succumbed to the injuries. 
3.	
On 16th October 1982, the Trial Court convicted appellant no. 1 
and appellant no. 2 for the offences alleged against them, and a 
sentence of life imprisonment was imposed. The Trial Court acquitted 
the accused no. 1 as he had only held a danda and no injury marks 
were found on the deceased or PW-7 that were made using a danda. 
4.	
The present appellants are accused nos. 2 and 3. They had preferred 
an appeal before the High Court. By the impugned judgment, the 
High Court confirmed the judgment of the Trial Court.


--- PAGE 4 ---
142
[2025] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
5.	
The prosecution has examined 10 witnesses to prove their case. 
PW-1 (Dr. R. M. Bhardwaj) is the doctor who conducted the 
autopsy of the deceased, PW-2 (Dr. K. Chandra) is the doctor who 
examined the injuries of PW-7, and PW-3 (Dr. Pratibha Gupta) is 
the gynaecologist who examined PW-7. PW-4 (Amir Hussain) is the 
informant/complainant who has been examined as an eye witness to 
the offence. He was sleeping just a few steps away when he heard 
noises and rushed to the scene of the crime. PW-5 (Allah Baksh) 
and PW-6 (Mohd. Hanif) have been examined as eye-witnesses 
and arrived at the crime scene on hearing a gunshot. PW-7 is an 
injured witness who was allegedly in an illicit relationship with the 
deceased and was declared hostile when she claimed that PW-4 
and accused no. 1 shot the deceased and wounded her. PW-8 (Raj 
Bahadur Singh) is the constable who accompanied the dead body 
for autopsy. PW-9 (Noora) was acquainted with both the deceased 
and PW-7 and deposed on the existence of a relationship between 
the deceased and PW-7. PW-10 (Harpal Singh) is the Investigating 
Officer who initiated the inquest proceedings, drew a site map, made 
seizures and recorded statements of witnesses.
SUBMISSIONS
6.	
Learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants has taken us 
through the evidence of the prosecution witnesses. He submitted 
that both PW-5 (Allah Baksh) and PW-6 (Mohd. Hanif) had sworn 
affidavits at the time of consideration of bail applications of the 
appellants. Those affidavits were in favour of the accused. Though 
both the witnesses during their cross-examination have denied having 
filed such affidavits, the defence witnesses have proved the fact that 
such affidavits were filed. He pointed out that PW-5 stated that he 
had gone to the police station along with PW-4 and was detained 
at the police station. However, PW-6, son of PW-5, says that PW-5 
had not gone to the police station. 
7.	
Learned senior counsel submitted that there was no material on 
record to show that the deceased and PW-7 were maintaining an illicit 
relationship. He submitted that evidence of PW-7 shows that PW-4 
and one Abrar are the real culprits. They have falsely implicated the 
brothers of PW-7. He pointed out that although the incident occurred 
at 2:00 am on 5th May 1981, the FIR was lodged only at 6:30 am. 
Inquest of the dead body of deceased was done at 11:30 am. The 


--- PAGE 5 ---
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
143
Sakhawat and Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh
postmortem was conducted at 03:40 pm. He submitted that this 
delay creates a doubt about the veracity of the prosecution’s case. 
He submitted that the recovery of articles (weapons of offence) was 
not proved. Even the Forensic Science Laboratory Report (for short, 
the FSL Report) is not placed on record. He submitted that there 
are contradictions in the versions of PW-5 and PW-6, which make 
the evidence vulnerable. 
8.	
Learned senior counsel appearing for the State pointed out that the 
evidence of PW-5 and PW-6, which clearly ascribes roles to the 
appellants, has gone unchallenged as there was neither any material 
contradiction nor any omission brought on record. He submitted that 
even evidence of PW-4 is reliable and deserves acceptance. He 
pointed out that PW-7 turned hostile and therefore, her evidence 
will have to be kept out of consideration. He also pointed out that 
there are concurrent findings of fact by both the Trial Court and 
the High Court. By relying on the testimonies of PW-4, PW-5, and 
PW-6, and in the absence of any perversity in the findings of the 
Trial Court and the High Court, there is no reason to interfere with 
the impugned judgments. 
CONSIDERATION
9.	
We have carefully perused the evidence of the material prosecution 
witnesses. PW-4 is the first informant. He stated that he knew the 
appellants. He stated that accused no. 1 and the appellants were 
present in the Court. He stated that accused no. 1 and appellant 
no. 1 were real brothers, and appellant no. 3 was their cousin. He 
pointed out that the appellant no. 1 and accused no. 1 were the 
brothers of the injured witness, PW-7. He stated that the deceased 
had an illicit relationship with PW-7. He stated that he was doing 
joint farming with the deceased. He described the incident that took 
place at 2:00 a.m. He stated that the deceased was sleeping in his 
hut, and he was sleeping under a Babool tree. When he heard the 
sound of a gunshot, he opened his eyes and found that PW-5 and 
PW-6 had come there. He heard a voice from inside the hut saying, 
“Brother, you have done this wrong”. Thereafter, another gunshot 
was heard. He stated that he switched on a torchlight and looked 
towards the hut. He saw appellant no.1 with a country-made pistol 
in his hand. Appellant no. 2 had a knife in his hand, and accused 
no. 1 had a danda in his hand. They were clinging to PW-7. When 


--- PAGE 6 ---
144
[2025] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the witness raised an alarm, all three accused ran away. He stated 
that PW-7 had a bullet wound on her stomach and a knife wound 
on her back. He stated that the deceased had already died. In 
the cross-examination, he stated that he did not see the illicit 
relationship between the deceased and PW-7. He stated that this 
was a common discussion in the village. On the second sound of 
firing, while answering the question in the cross-examination about 
who fired the gunshot and at whom, PW-4 stated that he had only 
heard the sound of the second gunshot. He denied the suggestion 
that the police came to the village between 10:00 am and 11:00 am 
and arrested him. He also denied the suggestion that the police had 
kept him in custody till the next day. 
10.	 Now, we come to the evidence of PW-5. He identified the three 
accused before the Court. He stated that at 2:00 am, he was sleeping 
in his hut along with PW-6 (Mohd. Hanif). He was awakened by the 
sound of a firearm. He went near the hut of the deceased (Sukha) 
with a three-cell torch, when he saw that accused no. 1, appellant 
no. 1 and appellant no. 2 were clinging to PW-7, who was telling 
them, “Brother, you had done wrong”. Thereafter, the second sound 
of fire came. Then the three accused fled. He stated that appellant 
no. 1 was carrying a country-made pistol and appellant no. 2 was 
carrying a knife. In the cross-examination, he was confronted with 
the affidavit marked as ‘A’ by giving a suggestion that this affidavit 
was verified by him at the time when an application for bail of the 
appellants was considered. Witness denied having executed any 
such affidavit. He reiterated that he did not submit any affidavit. 
However, he has not been confronted with the specific parts of the 
affidavit during his cross-examination. He stated that he went to the 
police station at 8:00 am and was there until 8:00 am the next day. 
He stated that the Sub-Inspector left the police station after recording 
the report and directed that the witness should not be allowed to go. 
He stated that his son, PW-6 (Mohd. Hanif), did not visit the police 
station. The statement of PW-5 that the appellants were present with 
a country-made revolver and a knife, and were clinging to PW-7, has 
also not been challenged in the cross-examination at all. 
11.	 Now, we come to the evidence of PW-6 (Mohd. Hanif). He stated that 
at 02:00 am on the date of the incident, he was sleeping at home 
with his father, PW-5. His eyes opened after hearing a sound of 
firing. Thereafter, he, along with PW-5 (Allah Baksh), went towards 


--- PAGE 7 ---
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
145
Sakhawat and Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh
the hut of the deceased (Sukha). He stated that PW-4, who was 
sleeping under a babool tree, also woke up. He heard a voice 
saying, “Brother, I am telling the truth and will tell everyone that you 
have done wrong”. Then they heard one more gunshot. He stated 
that PW-4 and PW-5 were carrying a torch, and in the light of the 
torch, they saw the three accused clinging to PW-7. He also stated 
that appellant no. 1 was having a country-made pistol in his hand 
and appellant no.2 had a knife in his hand. When they shouted and 
ran towards the accused, all three accused fled away. PW-6 was 
confronted, in cross-examination, by showing an affidavit marked as 
‘B’. He denied having submitted any such affidavit. On the presence 
of appellants with a country-made gun and a knife, respectively, there 
was no serious cross-examination. Thus, his version about hearing 
two gunshots, the accused clinging to PW-7, and the accused carrying 
weapons has gone unchallenged. 
12.	 As regards the injury to PW-7, PW-2 (Dr. K. Chandra), a Medical 
Officer who examined PW-7, stated that there were multiple gunshot 
wounds. There was an incise wound of 6cm X 2cm, which was muscle 
deep on the front and left side of the neck. Four abrasions were 
found. He stated that the incised wound could have been caused 
by a knife. There is hardly any cross-examination on this aspect. 
13.	 PW-1 (Dr. R. M. Bhardwaj), a Senior Radiologist who had examined 
the body of the deceased, stated that a firearm wound having a size 
of 3cm x 2cm, which was in the chest cavity, deep in front of the left 
side chest, just below the left nipple, was seen. He stated that the 
firearm injury was sufficient in the ordinary course to cause death. 
14.	 PW-7 was declared hostile. She tried to make out a case that it was 
PW-4 who shot her in the stomach, and that one, Abrar, stabbed 
her in her neck. 
15.	 DW-1 is one Chhangu, who was the Pradhan of the village. He was 
examined to show that PW-4 was arrested and was kept in lockup for 
two days. He stated that affidavits of PW-5 and PW-6 were prepared 
in his presence in Rampur Kachehri. He stated that after the typist 
typed the affidavits, he read over them. DW-1 stated that the Oath 
Commissioner read over the affidavits to them. He stated that the 
deponents had put their thumb impressions below the statements. 
We find that in the examination-in-chief, he was not shown the 
affidavits marked as ‘A’ and ‘B’.


--- PAGE 8 ---
146
[2025] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
16.	 DW-2 is Mumtaz Ali, who was working with an advocate in his office. 
He stated that PW-5 and PW-6 put their thumb impressions in his 
presence, and he had verified the same. DW-3 (Radhyeshyam, 
Advocate) was the Oath Commissioner who stated that PW-5 and 
PW-6 affirmed affidavits before him, which were marked as ‘A’ and ‘B’. 
DW-4 (Pradeep Kumar Gupta) is the clerk of the Oath Commissioner 
who claimed to have read over the affidavits to PW-5 and PW-6. 
DW-2 (Mumtaz Ali) identified his signatures as attesting witness on 
statements marked as ‘A’ and ‘B’. 
17.	 We must record here that in the cross-examination of PWs-4, 5 and 
6, no material contradictions and omissions have been brought on 
record. The cross-examination, unfortunately, is very sketchy. But, 
there is something which goes to the root of the matter. Under 
Article 21 of the Constitution of India, the accused is entitled to a 
fair trial. Even the Police are under an obligation to carry out a fair 
investigation. This is a crucial aspect of fairness. The objective of 
the investigation is to ensure that the real culprits are brought to 
justice. The legal system must ensure that an innocent person is 
not punished.
18.	 We have perused the entire trial Court record. The appellant no.1 
made an application for bail before the Sessions Court. Appellant 
No. 2 and accused no.1 made another application. The order sheet 
of the bail application made by the appellant no.1 shows that the 
affidavits were produced in the bail application, and time was granted 
by the Session Court to file a counter-affidavit to the Investigating 
Officer. Bail was granted to the appellant no.1,by observing that all the 
eyewitnesses except PW-4 (complainant) have given their affidavits 
stating that the appellant no.1 was not the person who shot at the 
deceased. The order also refers to the affidavit of PW-7 (Nanhi), 
which is on record of the bail application. In the affidavit, she states 
that PW-4 (Amir Hussain) and one Akbar are the assailants of the 
deceased who injured her. Accused no.1 and appellant no.2 were 
granted bail by the Sessions Court by relying upon the affidavit of 
PW-7 (Nanhi).
19.	 There is something very crucial that the High Court and the Sessions 
Court have missed. In the cross-examination of PW-10 (Harpal Singh), 
Investigating Officer, the following questions were put:


--- PAGE 9 ---
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
147
Sakhawat and Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh
“Que. Except complainant other eyewitnesses had 
submitted their affidavits on behalf of accused persons in 
this Court at the time of bail, you had not filed any counter 
affidavit to those affidavits?
Ans. Witnesses were not found available to me as such 
I could not verify as to whether they had filed affidavits 
or not and on account of this reason I could not file any 
counter-affidavit also.
Que. Whether you had gone in search of those witnesses 
in regard to counter affidavit yourself or you had sent 
someone?
Ans. I had gone personally.
Que. You have not recorded anything in case diary about 
searching witnesses for counter-affidavit?
Ans. No, Sir, I had closed case diary after completing 
investigation.
Que. Have you recorded any entry in C.D. about tracing 
witnesses for counter-affidavit?
Ans. I do not recollect.
Que. When you did not find witnesses available whether 
you moved any application before court that you could 
not find witnesses available as such time be extended?
Ans. I had reported to Government counsel about not 
finding witnesses available.
Que. From copy of affidavit of injured Nanhi you had come 
to know this fact that Amir Hussain has committed murder?
Ans. Copy of the said affidavit had reached to me and 
such fact was lying mentioned in that affidavit.”
20.	 Thus, the fact that PW-5 and PW-6 had submitted the affidavits 
in the bail application in favour of the accused is admitted by the 
investigating officer. Even the affidavit of PW-7 (Nanhi) is admitted. 
Though there is a defence evidence adduced to prove the execution 
of the affidavits by PW-5 and PW-6, marked as Annexure ‘A’ and ‘B’, 
the police did not conduct an investigation by sending the affidavits 


--- PAGE 10 ---
148
[2025] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and admitted thumb impressions of the witnesses for examination 
by an expert. Thus, three major prosecution witnesses, who were 
the eyewitnesses, had admittedly filed the affidavits before the 
Session Court stating that the present appellants were not the 
culprits. The Session Court relied upon the affidavits for granting 
bail to the accused. After getting the knowledge of the affidavits, it 
was the duty of the Investigating Officer to record supplementary 
statements of these three eyewitnesses about the affidavits and the 
contents of the affidavits. He has come out with a lame excuse that 
he did not controvert the said affidavit by filing a counter-affidavit, 
as the witnesses could not be traced. If the presence of the witness 
is required during the investigation, there are elaborate provisions 
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the CrPC’) for 
procuring the presence of the witnesses. PW-10 has not explained 
what efforts he has made to call PW-5 to PW-7 to record their further 
statements. 
21.	 Thus, the scenario which emerges is that three out of four 
eyewitnesses had admittedly filed the affidavits during the bail 
hearing of the accused, stating that the accused were not involved. 
For whatever reason, the investigating officer did not controvert the 
affidavits, though time was granted to him. In fact, the stand taken 
by the affidavit of PW-7 is that PW-4 and Akbar are the assailants 
who killed the deceased and who injured her.
22.	 Thus, by failing to carry out further investigation on the basis of the said 
affidavits, the prosecution has failed to carry out a fair investigation. 
Moreover, the prosecution tried to suppress the affidavits.
23.	 Therefore, there is a serious doubt created about the truthfulness of 
the versions of PW-5 to PW-7 before the Court. It is pertinent to note 
that PW-5 was detained at the police station for 24 hours before his 
statement was recorded. A serious doubt is created whether these 
witnesses are telling the truth. Then, what survives is the evidence 
of PW-4. PW-7 in the affidavit has stated that, in fact, PW-4 was the 
assailant. As the prosecution has not conducted a fair investigation 
and has suppressed important material in the form of affidavits of 
PW-5 to PW-7, it is unsafe to convict the appellants only on the basis 
of the testimony of PW-4. The failure to conduct further investigation 
based on the affidavits goes to the root of the matter. The failure 
to recover the weapons of offence also becomes relevant in the 
background of these circumstances.


--- PAGE 11 ---
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
149
Sakhawat and Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh
24.	 Therefore, this is a case where there is failure on the part of the 
High Court and the Session Court to consider the cross-examination 
of PW-10 and the suppression of the affidavits by the prosecution. 
These highly relevant aspects have been completely overlooked by 
the High Court. 
25.	 Before we part with the judgment, we reiterate the direction issued in 
the order dated 8th February 2024, that the record of the Trial Court 
should not be referred to as “Lower Court Record”. Describing any 
Court as a “Lower Court” is against the ethos of our Constitution. 
The Registry has issued a Circular dated 28th February 2024 for 
giving effect to the order. The High Courts must take note of the 
above direction and act upon the same. 
26.	 Therefore, the appeal succeeds. The impugned judgments and orders 
insofar as the appellants are concerned are hereby set aside, and 
the appellants are acquitted of the offences alleged against them. 
Their bail bonds stand cancelled. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
