--- PAGE 1 ---
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 1054 : 2025 INSC 710
Virender Pal @ Vipin 
v. 
State of Haryana
(Criminal Appeal No. 342 of 2015)
15 May 2025
[Vikram Nath, Sanjay Karol and Sandeep Mehta,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards correctness of High Court order dismissing 
the appeal of the accused-appellant and upholding his conviction 
u/s.304-B of Penal Code, 1860.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – s.304-B – Dowry death – Persistent 
harassment and dowry demand – Accused-appellant was 
married to victim-deceased – Complainant-father of deceased 
gave dowry to appellant and his family but they remained 
dissatisfied and started subjecting deceased to harassment, 
taunts, and physical abuse – Panchayat meeting was 
called where appellant demanded certain sum from family 
of deceased – Deceased, on the day of the incident, had 
informed that she apprehended danger to her life – Thereafter, 
complainant received call that his daughter has died – Upon 
reaching matrimonial home, family of deceased learnt that she 
had jumped down from the roof of the house and ended her 
life – Appellant and his parents were charged u/s.304-B r/w. 
s.34 of IPC – Trial court convicted the appellant but acquitted 
his parents – High Court upheld the conviction and sentence 
of the appellant – Whether the conviction of the accused-
appellant require interference:
Held: No interference required – Two defences taken by accused, 
which are totally divergent are that deceased accidently fell down 
from the terrace and received injuries, or that deceased committed 
suicide by jumping from the terrace as she was perturbed because 
of the knee issue which was plaguing her – Explanation offered 
by defence that deceased fell down from the terrace or that she 
committed suicide by jumping off from the terrace is totally a figment 
* Author


--- PAGE 2 ---
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
1055
Virender Pal @ Vipin v. State of Haryana
of imagination unsubstantiated by evidence on record – Period 
between marriage and her death by severe traumatic injuries 
is just a year and four months – There are consistent evidence 
from testimonies of material prosecution witnesses that deceased 
was continuously harassed by the appellant and his relatives on 
account of demand of dowry – Deceased being a young woman 
of 30 years could not have been so perturbed by the knee issue 
that the resolution would require a panchayat meeting – Version of 
prosecution witnesses that panchayat was held to discuss issues 
of demand of dowry and the maltreatment being meted out to 
deceased is the only acceptable theory – Plea taken by defence 
that deceased was so perturbed by her knee issues that she 
ended her life by jumping from the terrace is absolutely flimsy and 
unbelievable – Rather this is nothing, but a fictional story created 
by appellant as an afterthought to escape conviction – Appellant 
must have shifted the dead body to mislead the investigation – Trial 
court as well as High Court have distinguished the case of the 
acquitted accused persons from that of the appellant by assigning 
cogent reasons – Appellant, being the husband of deceased, was 
under a greater obligation, both moral as well as legal, to ensure 
the well-being of his wife, but he failed to do so – He was primarily 
responsible for demands of money being made from deceased 
and her maternal family members – All the ingredients required to 
prove offence punishable u/s.304-B of IPC against the appellant 
are made out from the evidence on record – Impugned judgments 
and orders do not suffer from any infirmity. [Paras 28, 30, 32, 34, 
36, 37, 39, 40]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.296 – Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 – s.332 – Evidence of formal character 
received on affidavit – Approach of trial court, if flawed:
Held: There is an apparent flaw in the approach of the trial Court 
inasmuch as, neither the number and nature of injuries were 
elaborated by the medical officer in his testimony, nor did he give 
any specific opinion regarding the cause of death – If the Public 
Prosecutor was negligent in performing his duties, the presiding 
officer of the trial court should have remained vigilant and court 
questions should have been put to the medical officer regarding 
the number and nature of injuries caused to deceased and to seek 
a clear opinion regarding cause of death – Approach of the trial 


--- PAGE 3 ---
1056
[2025] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Court in accepting testimony of the Medical Officer on affidavit, is 
contrary to the mandate of s.296 of CrPC (corresponding s.332 
of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023) which provides 
that only evidence of formal character may be received on an 
affidavit  – Defence did not take any objection to the mode of 
recording evidence adopted by the presiding officer – Omission on 
the part of the presiding officer tantamounts to a curable irregularity 
because no prejudice was caused to appellant by following such 
course of action. [Paras 22, 25, 26]
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
List of Keywords
Dowry death; Taunted for bringing insufficient dowry; Apprehending 
impending danger to life; Harassment and demands of dowry; 
Unnatural death at matrimonial home; Presumption under s.313 
of Evidence Act, 1872; Mental and physical abuse; Essential 
ingredients of dowry death; Insufficient dowry; Court questions to 
medical officer; Testimony of medical officer on affidavit; Curable 
irregularity; Ante-mortem injuries caused by mechanical violence; 
Diametrically opposite defence; Fictional story created to escape 
conviction; Cruelty in matrimonial home; Grave danger to life.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
342 of 2015
From the Judgment and Order dated 15.05.2014 of the High Court 
of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in CRLA No. 2212 of 2011
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Shree Prakash Sinha, Rakesh Mishra, Anand Kumar, Nawalendra 
Kumar, Ms. Shwetam, Rishabh Kumar, Shekhar Kumar.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Samar Vijay Singh, Ms. Sabarni Som, Fateh Singh, Aman Dev 
Sharma, Ms. Kanika, Makrand Pratap Singh.


--- PAGE 4 ---
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
1057
Virender Pal @ Vipin v. State of Haryana
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Mehta, J.
1.	
Heard.
2.	
The appellant1, through this appeal by special leave, seeks to assail 
the judgment dated 15th May, 2014, passed by the High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh2, whereby it dismissed Criminal 
Appeal No. S-2212-SB of 20113 preferred by the appellant. The 
appellant, in the said appeal, had assailed the judgment and order 
of sentence dated 26th May, 2011 and 28th May, 2011, rendered by 
the Sessions Judge, Panipat4, convicting the accused-appellant for 
the offence punishable under Section 304-B of the Indian Penal 
Code, 18605 and sentencing him to undergo rigorous imprisonment 
for 10 years.
3.	
Brief facts relevant and essential for disposal of the present appeal 
are noted hereinbelow.
4.	
Shri Balraj Singh (PW1-Complainant)6 lodged a complaint on 
1st June, 2009, at the Police Station Chandni Bagh, Panipat, alleging 
inter alia that the accused-appellant and his daughter, Punita alias 
Gayatri7, got married on 28th February, 2008 as per Hindu rites and 
ceremonies. At the time of their marriage, the complainant had given 
dowry to the accused-appellant and his family beyond his capacity. 
However, the accused-appellant, along with his mother, father, 
brother, and uncle, remained dissatisfied with the dowry and started 
subjecting deceased-Punita to harassment, taunts, and physical 
abuse soon after the marriage. The complainant further alleged that 
during her visits to the parental home, his daughter informed him, 
1	
Hereinafter, being referred to as “accused-appellant”.
2	
Hereinafter, being referred to as “High Court”.
3	
Hereinafter, being referred to as “criminal appeal”.
4	
Hereinafter, being referred to as “trial Court”.
5	
Hereinafter, being referred to as “IPC”.
6	
Hereinafter, referred to as “complainant”.
7	
Hereinafter, being referred to as “deceased-Punita”.


--- PAGE 5 ---
1058
[2025] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
his wife Rajwati Devi, and his son Pramod Kumar (PW-2) about 
the ill-treatment meted out by her in-laws, who repeatedly taunted 
her for bringing insufficient dowry and coming from a poor family. 
Consequently, the complainant, along with his brother-in-law, Puran 
Singh and his nephew Jitender Pal (PW-10), visited the matrimonial 
home of the deceased during which the accused-appellant, his 
father and his uncle, Sukhbir allegedly demanded Rs.5 lakhs to 
secure a job for the accused-appellant. The complainant assured 
them of making arrangements and later sent his daughter back to 
her matrimonial home after giving her a sum of Rs.50,000/-. Despite 
this, the accused-appellant and his family members did not relent 
from subjecting deceased-Punita to cruelty. On 1st June, 2009, at 
approximately 07:45 am, the deceased-Punita telephonically informed 
her brother Satender Kumar (PW-3) that on the previous night, her 
husband, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, and uncle-in-
law had assaulted her, and she requested him to come down to her 
matrimonial home immediately, apprehending impending danger to 
her life. At about 08:00 am, the complainant received a call from the 
accused-appellant informing him that his daughter had died. Upon 
reaching Panipat, the maternal family members of deceased-Punita 
learnt that she had jumped down from the roof of the house and 
ended her life due to persistent harassment and demands of dowry 
meted out to her by the matrimonial family.
5.	
Based on this complaint, an FIR, bearing No. 335 of 2009, came to 
be registered at the Police Station Chandni Bagh, Panipat, against 
the accused-appellant and his family members8 for the offences 
punishable under Section 304-B read with Section 34 of the IPC 
and subsequently, the investigation commenced. On completion 
of the investigation, a charge sheet was filed against the accused-
appellant, his father and mother for the offences punishable under 
Section 304-B read with Section 34 of the IPC. However, the police 
did not find any cogent evidence against the appellant’s brother 
i.e., Harinder Kumar@Billu and uncle i.e., Sukhbir Singh. Thus, 
the charges against the said accused persons were dropped by 
the Investigating Officer. The case was committed to the Sessions 
8	
Harinder Kumar @ Billu (Brother of the appellant), Rajeshwar Dayal (Father of the appellant), Brajesh 
Rani (Mother of the appellant) and Sukhbir Singh (Uncle of the appellant).


--- PAGE 6 ---
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
1059
Virender Pal @ Vipin v. State of Haryana
Court, and charges under Section 304-B read with Section 34 of the 
IPC were framed against the accused-appellant and his father and 
mother who denied the charges and claimed trial.
6.	
The prosecution examined 12 witnesses and exhibited 17 documents. 
The details of the witnesses are as follows:
Prosecution Witness (PW)
Role/Position
PW-1 Balraj Singh
Complainant/father of deceased
PW-2 Parmod Kumar
Brother of deceased
PW-3 Satender Kumar
Brother of deceased
PW-4 Jagbir Singh
Draftsman officer, Superintendent 
of Police, Panipat
PW-5 Gurvinder Singh
Constable
PW-6 Radhey Shyam
Constable
PW-7 Dharampal
Assistant Sub Inspector
PW-8 Mahender Singh
Constable
PW-9 Dr. Rahul Diwan
Medical Officer, General Hospital, 
Panipat
PW-10 Jitender Pal
Nephew of PW1
PW-11 Saifudeen
SHO of P.S. Chandni Bagh, Panipat
PW-12 Ashok Kumar
Assistant Sub-Inspector
7.	
The accused persons were examined under Section 313 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 19739, and, upon being confronted 
with the circumstances appearing against them in the prosecution 
case, they denied the same and claimed innocence, asserting that 
they had been falsely implicated. The accused-appellant contended 
that no dowry demands were ever made, and the deceased was 
never subjected to any maltreatment in the matrimonial home. It 
was further stated by the accused-appellant that deceased-Punita 
was receiving medical treatment for knee pain, and, on the day of 
the incident, he had gone to attend a job interview.
8.	
In support of their defence, the accused persons examined eight 
witnesses:
9	
Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘CrPC’.


--- PAGE 7 ---
1060
[2025] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Defence Witness 
(DW)
Role/Position
DW-1 – Mohan Lal
Neighbor of the appellant.
DW-2 – Savdeep Kaur
Previous landlord of the Appellant
DW-3 – Hans Raj
Resident, Power House Colony, Panipat
DW-4 – Ram Phal
Driver, Resident, Khindora Village, 
Ghaziabad
DW-5 – Raghubir Singh Orthopedic Surgeon, Raghudeep 
Hospital, Panipat
DW-6 – Dr. V.K.Gupta
Orthopaedic Surgeon, Asian Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Faridabad
DW-7– Dr. Sandeep 
Grover
M.D. Medicines, D.M. Clinical Immunology, 
Meerut (UP)
DW-8 - Meghnath
Resident, Khindora Village
9.	
At the conclusion of the trial, the trial Court observed that the demands 
for money and valuable articles are directly related to the dowry in 
the marriage, as the same were made to the father of deceased-
Punita by the accused-appellant and his relatives. The trial Court 
noted that the prosecution had successfully established the charges 
against the accused-appellant, primarily relying on the evidence of 
dowry demands, ill-treatment and circumstantial evidence as stated 
by the close parental relatives of deceased-Punita including her 
father, i.e., the complainant Shri Balraj Singh (PW-1). Additionally, 
the Court noted that the accused-appellant’s father and mother 
were not specifically found to have made the demands of dowry, 
further confirming that only the accused-appellant was involved in 
the demand for dowry from deceased-Punita soon before her death. 
The trial Court held that deceased-Punita died an unnatural death 
at her matrimonial home within one year and three months of her 
marriage and that there was ample evidence on record for the Court 
to raise the presumption under Section 113-B of Indian Evidence Act, 
187210 against the accused-appellant as no satisfactory explanation 
was provided by him regarding the unnatural death of his wife in the 
10	
Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘Evidence Act’.


--- PAGE 8 ---
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
1061
Virender Pal @ Vipin v. State of Haryana
matrimonial home. The trial Court, after appreciating the evidence, 
acquitted the parents of the accused-appellant of the charges as 
framed against them but convicted the accused-appellant for the 
offence punishable under section 304-B of the IPC and sentenced 
him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10 years, vide judgment 
and order dated 26th May, 2011 and 28th May, 2011, respectively.
10.	 Being aggrieved, the accused-appellant preferred an appeal before 
the High Court assailing the judgement and order of sentence and 
conviction passed by the trial Court. The High Court, while adjudicating 
the said appeal, referred to the testimonies of the complainant 
and the prosecution witnesses who deposed about the continuous 
demands for dowry associated with mental and physical abuse 
meted out to deceased-Punita and found them to be consistent, 
thereby establishing the charge against the accused-appellant beyond 
all manner of doubt. The Court noted that once the prosecution 
discharged the initial burden of proving the factum of harassment 
meted out to the deceased-Punita relating to demand of dowry and 
that such harassment continued till soon before her death, then by 
virtue of Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, the burden shifted on 
to the accused-appellant to disprove that his wife’s death was not 
related to any dowry demands and not an unnatural one. However, 
the accused has failed to discharge the said burden. Accordingly, the 
High Court, vide its judgment dated 15th May, 2014, dismissed the 
appeal and upheld the accused-appellant’s conviction and sentence 
as recorded by the trial Court. The said impugned order is assailed 
by the accused-appellant before this Court via special leave.
Submissions on behalf of the appellant: -
11.	 Learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the accused-appellant, 
vehemently and fervently argued that deceased-Punita suffered from 
a knee problem because of which she was under depression, leading 
her to commit suicide. Further, there was no demand of dowry by 
the accused-appellant as the demand of cash for securing job for 
the accused-appellant cannot be treated equivalent to a demand 
of dowry. He urged that there is no material on record which can 
establish beyond reasonable doubt that dowry was demanded by the 
accused-appellant soon before the death of his wife or that she was 
harassed on account of such demand. The statements of Shri Balraj 
Singh (PW-1), Pramod Kumar (PW-2), Satendra Kumar (PW-3) and 


--- PAGE 9 ---
1062
[2025] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Jitendra Pal (PW-10) are not consistent but contradictory in nature 
with respect to the alleged cruelty meted out by the accused-appellant 
and his family members to deceased-Punita with respect to dowry 
demand. For a presumption to be raised under Section 113-B of the 
Evidence Act, the following conditions have to be fulfilled: 
i.	
That the woman met with unnatural death within a period of 
seven years of her marriage;
ii.	
The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her 
husband or his relatives;
iii.	
Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with, any 
demand for dowry; and 
iv.	
Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death.
12.	 Furthermore, it was urged that the prosecution was under obligation 
to prove that soon before the occurrence, cruelty or harassment 
was meted out to deceased-Punita, which compelled her to take 
the extreme step of ending her own life, however, the prosecution 
miserably failed to discharge this onus cast upon it by law. Learned 
counsel, thus, urged that the High Court committed a grave error 
while reappraising the evidence and rejecting the appeal of the 
accused-appellant. His fervent plea was that no clear evidence 
was led by the prosecution to show whether the deceased-Punita 
committed suicide by jumping from the terrace or was it a simple 
case of accidental fall.
On these grounds, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
accused-appellant implored this Court to accept the appeal, reverse 
the judgment of the Courts below and acquit the accused-appellant 
of the charges.
Submissions on behalf of the respondent-State: -
13.	 On the other hand, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the 
respondent-State, vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions 
advanced on behalf of learned counsel for the accused-appellant. 
He urged that the High Court has rightly held that there is ample 
evidence of unimpeachable nature against the accused-appellant 
establishing his guilt for the charges levelled. As per the evidence 
on record, dowry articles have been recovered from the matrimonial 
house of the deceased-Punita. Further, the evidence of the material 


--- PAGE 10 ---
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
1063
Virender Pal @ Vipin v. State of Haryana
prosecution witnesses is consistent with regard to demand of dowry 
and harassment meted out by the accused-appellant to deceased-
Punita soon before her death. Since the prosecution has proved the 
essential ingredients of dowry death, the Court has to infer the guilt 
of the accused-appellant, unless he is able to discharge the burden 
cast upon him by virtue of Section 113-B of the Evidence Act. In the 
present case, the prosecution has led reliable evidence showing that 
the deceased-Punita, met with an unnatural death within seven years 
of marriage, and that she was continuously harassed and mal-treated 
for dowry demands by her husband or his family members soon before 
her death. As the prosecution has fulfilled the necessary conditions 
for invoking the presumption under Section 113-B of the Evidence 
Act, the burden shifted on to the accused-appellant by virtue of the 
said provision, however, the accused-appellant hopelessly failed to 
rebut the presumption.
On these grounds, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of 
respondent, thus urged that the judgments of the Courts below are 
unassailable and implored the Court to dismiss the appeal.
Discussion and Analysis: -
14.	 We have heard the submissions advanced at bar and have gone 
through the impugned judgment and material placed on record.
15.	 For appreciating the submissions advanced at bar, it will be apposite 
to discuss the statements of the material prosecution witnesses, 
which provide the substratum of allegations set out against the 
accused-appellant in the case at hand.
16.	 In support of its case, the prosecution examined Shri Balraj Singh 
(PW-1), the complainant and father of the deceased-Punita, who 
testified that his daughter was married to the accused-appellant on 
28th February, 2008 and a substantial dowry was given as per his 
capacity, but the accused persons were dissatisfied and subjected 
his daughter to cruelty for demand of additional dowry. A panchayat 
was called, in which, he along with Jitender Pal (PW-10) and Puran 
Singh went to his daughter’s matrimonial house at village Khindora 
and requested the matrimonial relatives with folded hands not 
to maltreat his daughter. Sukhbir took him out of the house and 
demanded Rs. 5 lakhs for securing a job for accused-appellant. 
Being left with no other option but to accede to this illegal demand, 
he assured all the accused persons that he would give Rs. 5 lakhs 


--- PAGE 11 ---
1064
[2025] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
but needed some time to arrange for the same. When Sukhbir and 
the accused-appellant came to take deceased-Punita from her 
parental house, the complainant gave them Rs. 50,000/-. However, 
after a few months, the accused persons again started harassing 
his daughter for demand of dowry.
17.	 Pramod Kumar (PW-2), brother of deceased-Punita, testified that 
his sister was harassed and maltreated by her husband (accused-
appellant) and her in-laws for bringing less dowry. Similarly, Satender 
Kumar (PW-3), brother of deceased-Punita, deposed that after his 
sister’s marriage, her in-laws harassed her over insufficient dowry. 
Jitender Pal (PW-10), who was the nephew of Shri Balraj Singh 
(PW-1), deposed that he accompanied the complainant and others to a 
Panchayat meeting, convened at the house of the accused-appellant, 
where the accused-appellant and his uncle, Sukhbir demanded Rs. 
5 lakhs to secure employment for the former.
18.	 Rahul Diwan (PW-9), the Medical Officer, who conducted 
post-mortem upon the body of deceased-Punita, stated that she had 
sustained multiple injuries, including massive subdural hematoma in 
the brain, contusions on the scalp and chin, and abrasions on the 
left hypochondrium and thigh. He further opined that the cause of 
death of Punita was because of shock and hemorrhage due to an 
ante-mortem injury to the vital organ, i.e., the brain.
19.	 In defence, Mohan Lal (DW-1), a neighbor of the accused-appellant 
having a shop adjacent to the house of the accused-appellant, 
deposed that he had never heard of any dispute amongst the family 
members of the accused-appellant. Dr. Raghbir Singh (DW-5), Dr. V.K. 
Gupta (DW-6), and Dr. Sandeep Grover (DW-7) were examined to 
prove the accused-appellant’s defence theory regarding the medical 
condition being faced by deceased-Punita relating to her knee.
20.	 In the present case, the accused-appellant contends that the case of 
prosecution relies solely on general allegations of dowry demands, 
unsupported by any concrete evidence, thereby, entitling him to the 
benefit of doubt. The accused-appellant also emphasizes that the 
essential ingredients under Section 304-B of the IPC, that the death 
of the woman otherwise than for natural causes should have taken 
place within seven years of marriage and the existence of credible 
evidence establishing cruelty or harassment by the husband or his 
relatives in connection with dowry demands etc., have not been 


--- PAGE 12 ---
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
1065
Virender Pal @ Vipin v. State of Haryana
proved beyond reasonable doubt. It is contended that the mere fact 
of an unnatural death without a clear nexus between the alleged 
harassment and the death is insufficient for conviction.
21.	 It is well established from the evidence available on record that that 
Punita died under circumstances other than natural, as stated by 
Dr. Rahul Diwan, Medical Officer (PW-9). The Medical Officer deposed 
on oath that he carried out the post-mortem examination on the 
dead body of deceased-Punita and issued the post-mortem report.11
22.	 We are constrained to note here that there is an apparent flaw in 
the approach of the trial Court inasmuch as, neither the number 
and nature of injuries were elaborated by the medical officer in 
his testimony, nor did he give any specific opinion regarding the 
cause of death. We are of the firm view that if the Public Prosecutor 
was negligent in performing his duties, the presiding officer of the 
trial Court should have remained vigilant and the Court questions 
should have been put to the medical officer regarding the number 
and nature of injuries caused to the deceased and to seek a clear 
opinion regarding the cause of death.
23.	 Be that as it may, Dr. Rahul Diwan (PW-9), Medical Officer, proved 
his affidavit12 wherein, the following injuries were noted on the dead 
body of the deceased: -
“3. Injuries:
(i) Contusion present on bilateral parietal region of scalp. 
On dissection all the layers of scalp show echymosis. On 
opening of skull, there is massive subdural haematoma 
involving both parieto temporal region of brain with 
underlying brain parenchyma haemorhagic(sic).
(ii) A red contusion of size 5 x 1 cm on chin in midline 
with infiltration(sic) in surrounding tissues.
(iii) Two red coloured contused abrasion of size 2 x 1 cm 
and 1 x 1 cm on left hypochondrium. On dissection there 
is underlying echymosis.
(iv) A red coloured abrasion of size 8 x 1 cm on left(sic) 
thigh on posteriolateral aspect.”
11	
Exhibit PK-3.
12	
Exhibit PK.


--- PAGE 13 ---
1066
[2025] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
24.	 In this affidavit, the cause of death has been opined as shock and 
haemorrhage due to injury on the vital organ, i.e., brain, which was 
ante-mortem in nature.
25.	 We feel that the approach of the trial Court in accepting the testimony 
of Dr. Rahul Diwan (PW-9), the Medical Officer on affidavit, is contrary 
to the mandate of Section 296 of the CrPC (corresponding Section 
332 of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023) which provides 
that only evidence of formal character may be received on an affidavit.
26.	 However, the fact remains that the defence has cross-examined Dr. 
Rahul Diwan (PW-9), the Medical Officer, with reference to the affidavit 
and the post-mortem report. It is also clear that the defence did not 
take any objection to the mode of recording evidence adopted by 
the presiding officer. Thus, we feel that this omission on the part of 
the presiding officer tantamounts to a curable irregularity because 
no prejudice was caused to the accused-appellant by following such 
course of action.
27.	 Upon going through the post-mortem report13, it is clear that the death 
of Punita was caused by ante-mortem injuries caused by mechanical 
violence and hence, her death was definitely otherwise than under 
natural circumstances within the meaning of Section 304-B IPC.
28.	 The accused has taken alternative defences for explaining the death 
of Punita. The two defences which are totally divergent are (a) that 
the deceased accidently fell down from the terrace and received 
the injuries, or (b) that the deceased-Punita committed suicide by 
jumping from the terrace as she was perturbed because of the knee 
issue which was plaguing her. We feel that this diametrically opposite 
defence taken by the accused-appellant does not have any legs to 
stand and we have strong reasons to observe so.
29.	 Satender Kumar (PW-3), the brother of deceased-Punita, categorically 
stated that when he reached the matrimonial home of his sister after 
receiving the news of her death, he saw the dead body of his sister 
lying on a cot at the second floor of the building and blood was 
oozing from her nose and ear. No cross-examination whatsoever was 
conducted from Satender Kumar (PW-3) on this important aspect 
of his testimony. Thus, the explanation offered by the defence that 
13	
Exhibit PK-3.


--- PAGE 14 ---
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
1067
Virender Pal @ Vipin v. State of Haryana
deceased-Punita fell down from the terrace and received injuries or 
that she committed suicide by jumping off from the terrace is totally 
a figment of imagination unsubstantiated by the evidence on record.
30.	 The deceased was married to the accused-appellant on 28th February, 
2008. She received injuries associated with violence and died on 1st 
June, 2009, while she was at her matrimonial home. Thus, the period 
between the marriage and her death by severe traumatic injuries is 
just a year and four months. There are consistent evidence from the 
testimonies of the material prosecution witnesses, i.e., Balraj Singh 
(PW-1) father of the deceased, Parmod Kumar (PW-2) brother of 
the deceased, and Satender Kumar (PW-3) another brother of the 
deceased, that deceased-Punita was continuously being harassed 
by the accused-appellant and his relatives on account of the 
demand of dowry. At one point of time, a sum of Rs. 50,000/- was 
also given to the accused-appellant and Sukhbir Singh, who had 
come to the house of the complainant, Balraj Singh (PW-1) and 
demanded a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs for taking deceased-Punita back to 
the matrimonial home. This amount was being demanded so that the 
accused-appellant could secure employment. The accused-appellant 
brought deceased-Punita to the matrimonial home after receiving an 
amount of Rs.50,000/- but little time thereafter the maltreatment of 
deceased-Punita resumed for the remaining amount. No significant 
cross-examination was conducted from Balraj Singh (PW-1) on this 
important aspect of his testimony.
31.	 Furthermore, Satender Kumar (PW-3), made a categorical statement 
that on the date of the incident, deceased-Punita called him over 
telephone, and she was in despair and was crying. She conveyed 
that the accused-appellant had beaten her earlier night and she is 
apprehending that she might be killed. She made a fervent plea to 
be saved from the clutches of the accused persons. This version of 
Satender Kumar (PW-3) could not be shaken in cross-examination. 
Hence, there is sufficient evidence on the record to show that 
deceased-Punita was continuously harassed even before her death 
in her matrimonial home on account of demand of dowry and money. 
32.	 The fact regarding holding of a Panchayat is corroborated by the 
defence witnesses as well. Of course, the version of the defence 
witnesses is that the Panchayat was held to discuss the medical 
issues being faced by the deceased-Punita. The only medical issue 


--- PAGE 15 ---
1068
[2025] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
which deceased-Punita was facing as per the defence was some 
knee problem. We feel that deceased-Punita being a young woman 
of less than 30 years could not have been so perturbed by the knee 
issue that the resolution would require a Panchayat meeting. Thus, 
this flimsy defence taken by the accused-appellant is not tenable 
and the version of the prosecution witnesses that the panchayat was 
held to discuss the issues of demand of dowry and the maltreatment 
being meted out to the deceased is the only acceptable theory.
33.	 Furthermore, whatever the gravity of the knee issues may have been, 
that by itself could not have instigated deceased-Punita to end her 
life because admittedly she was being provided treatment, and her 
pain had subsidised as per the evidence of the defence witness, Dr. 
Sandeep Grover (DW-7).
34.	 Dr. V.K. Gupta (DW-6) and Dr. Sandeep Grover (DW-7) also 
corroborated the same and stated that the patient was being given 
symptomatic treatment. Hence, the plea taken by the defence that 
deceased-Punita was so perturbed by her knee issues that she 
ended her life by jumping from the terrace is absolutely flimsy and 
unbelievable. Rather we find that this is nothing, but a fictional story 
created by the accused-appellant as an afterthought to escape 
conviction. This conclusion is further fortified by the evidence of 
Shri Balraj Singh (PW-1), Pramod Kumar(PW-2) and Satender 
Kumar(PW-3) being the maternal family members of deceased-
Punita who stated that prior to her marriage, deceased-Punita was 
not suffering from any ailment of knees.
35.	 As has been noted above, the dead body of deceased-Punita was 
found lying on a cot at the second floor of the house of the accused-
appellant. On the contrary, the defence witness, Mohan Lal (DW-1), 
stated that he saw the accused-appellant shifting the deceased 
to the hospital in his own car. However, no such theory has been 
propounded in the statement of the accused-appellant recorded 
under Section 313 of the CrPC.
36.	 Furthermore, if at all, the body of deceased-Punita had been brought 
down and had been taken to the hospital by the accused-appellant 
in his car, then there was no reason as to why the body was seen 
by the witnesses lying on the second floor of the house. Apparently 
thus, the accused-appellant must have shifted the dead body to 
mislead the investigation.


--- PAGE 16 ---
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
1069
Virender Pal @ Vipin v. State of Haryana
37.	 The trial Court as well as the High Court have distinguished the case 
of the acquitted accused persons from that of the accused-appellant by 
assigning cogent reasons. The accused-appellant, being the husband 
of deceased-Punita, was under a greater obligation, both moral as 
well as legal, to ensure the well-being of his wife, but he failed to do 
so. He was primarily responsible for the demands of money being 
made from the deceased and her maternal family members.
38.	 At the cost of repetition, it may be noted that the demand of money 
was being made so that the accused-appellant could secure a job. 
The deceased called her brother Satender Kumar (PW-3) on the 
date of incident at 07:45 am and complained that she was being 
maltreated/beaten by her matrimonial family members including the 
accused-appellant and expressed a grave danger to her life. Hence, 
there is ample evidence on record establishing that deceased-Punita 
was being treated with cruelty in her matrimonial home owing to the 
demand of dowry soon before her death.
39.	 Consequently, all the ingredients required to prove the offence 
punishable under Section 304-B of the IPC against the accused-
appellant are made out from the evidence available on record.
40.	 As a result, we are not inclined to interfere with the conviction 
of the accused-appellant as recorded by the trial Court and later 
affirmed by the High Court. The impugned judgments and orders i.e., 
judgment and order of sentence dated 26th May, 2011 and 28th May, 
2011, passed by the Sessions Judge, Panipat and judgment dated 
15th May, 2014, passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, 
do not suffer from any infirmity warranting interference by this Court.
41.	 The appeal, thus, fails and is hereby dismissed.
42.	 The accused-appellant is on bail. He shall surrender within a period 
of four weeks from today and serve the remaining sentence awarded 
to him by the trial Court.
43.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
