--- PAGE 1 ---
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 1361 : 2025 INSC 880
Esakkimuthu 
v. 
State Represented by the Inspector of Police
(Criminal Appeal No. 3099 of 2025)
22 July 2025
[Vikram Nath* and Sandeep Mehta, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the courts below erred in convicting the appellants and 
sentencing them to life imprisonment for the murder of the deceased 
relying upon the testimonies of PW-1 and PW-2, who were interested 
witnesses being the son and wife of the deceased respectively.
Headnotes†
Evidence – Related/Interested witnesses – Reliance upon – 
When not proper – Appellants, A1 and A2 were convicted 
u/s.302, IPC and u/s.302 r/w 34, IPC, respectively for the murder 
of the deceased relying upon the eye-witness accounts of PW-1 
and PW-2 (son and wife of the deceased) – Interference with:
Held: When the witnesses are related/interested, their testimonies 
have to be scrutinized with greater care and circumspection – In 
the instant case, the two key witnesses are the son and wife of 
the deceased, who are very well-interested witnesses in the case 
therefore, their testimonies shall have to be treated with great 
caution and required to be met with a stricter standard of proof in 
order to rule out any embellishment – Though, the Courts below 
relied heavily on their testimonies to bring home the guilt of the 
accused persons, on facts, their presence at the place of crime in 
itself is highly contentious and was not proven definitely – No other 
alleged eye-witness supported the prosecution’s case, independent 
witnesses were declared hostile – The fact that the deceased was 
a habitual drunkard and a convicted criminal under the Goondas 
Act makes it highly probable that the deceased had enmities with 
multiple people who may have assaulted him and caused his 
death – Not proven beyond doubt that in all human probability, the 
* Author


--- PAGE 2 ---
1362
[2025] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
act must have been done by the accused only – Prosecution did 
not discharge its burden of establishing the guilt of the accused 
persons beyond reasonable doubt – Impugned judgment passed by 
the High Court, as well as the judgment of the Trial Court, quashed 
and set aside – Appellants acquitted – Penal Code, 1860 – s.302 
r/w 34, 120B. [Paras 22, 23, 30-34]
Evidence – Related/Interested witnesses – Appreciation – 
Standard of proof, discussed. [Paras 22, 23]
Case Law Cited
Mohamed Jabbar Ali & Ors. v. State of Assam, Criminal Appeal 
No. 1105 of 2010; Gangadhar Behera v. State of Orissa [2002] 
Supp. 3 SCR 183 : AIR 2002 SC 3633 – relied on.
Hari Obula Reddy and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh (1981) 
3 SCC 675 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Tamil Nadu Goondas Act, 1982.
List of Keywords
Related/Interested witnesses; Eyewitnesses; Ongoing enmity; 
Conviction on basis of eyewitness accounts; Presence at the place 
of crime not proven; Presence at the crime scene doubtful; Guilt 
of the accused persons not proved beyond reasonable doubt; 
Witnesses turned hostile; Motive; Independent witnesses declared 
hostile; Habitual drunkard; Contradictions; Stricter standard of 
proof; Distance range; Distance of 16 kilometers; House of the 
deceased; Liquor shop; Bicycle; Tasmac shop; Charges under 
Section 120B, IPC unproven.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
3099 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 10.09.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras at Madurai in CRLAMD No. 218 of 2020
With
Criminal Appeal No. 3100 of 2025


--- PAGE 3 ---
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
1363
Esakkimuthu v. State Represented by the Inspector of Police
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
S. Nagamuthu, Sr. Adv., Vairawan A.s, Bilal Mansoor, Shreyas 
Kaushal, S. Geyolin Selvam, Alagiri K, M.P. Parthiban, Ankur 
Prakash, Mrs. Priyanka Singh, Bilal Mansoor, Shreyas Kaushal, 
S. Geyolin Selvam, Alagiri K.
Advs. for the Respondent:
V. krishnamurthy, Sr. Adv., Sabarish Subramanian.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Vikram Nath, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The instant appeals have been preferred by the accused-appellants 
against the judgment dated 10.09.2024 passed by the Madras High 
Court in Crl. A (MD) No. 218 of 2020 wherein the High Court dismissed 
the criminal appeal(s) preferred by the appellants and confirmed 
the conviction and sentence imposed by the Trial Court in a matter 
involving Sections 302 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 18601. 
3.	
The brief facts forming the basis of the current appeals are as 
elucidated below. The case at hand involves two accused persons – 
Pitchu Mani @ Pitchai Mani [Accused No. 1/A1] and Esakkimuthu 
[Accused No. 2/A2]. As per the prosecution story, PW-1, Moses 
Livingston, son of the deceased, Edison Suvisedha Muthu2 was a 
resident of South Omanallur village in Tirunelveli district and is the 
de-facto complainant in the matter. Both the accused persons are 
also the residents of the same village. The deceased used to know 
one Balasubramnian, father of A1, and in July, 2011, the deceased 
was informed to the jurisdictional police by the said Balasubramanian. 
This had allegedly given rise to a feud between the two parties and 
led the deceased to attack Balasubramanian, who sustained injuries 
on his left hand due to the said attack. This ongoing enmity has 
precisely been ascribed to be the motive by the prosecution behind 
1	
IPC
2	
“Deceased”, hereinafter.


--- PAGE 4 ---
1364
[2025] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the murder of the deceased by the appellants, A1 being the son of 
Balasubramanian and A2 being a relative of A1.
4.	
It is further stated by the family members of the deceased himself, 
who deposed as PW-1 (son of the deceased) and PW-2 Santhi 
(wife of the deceased) that the deceased was a habitual drunkard 
and had several cases registered against him. In fact, the deceased 
was detained under the Tamil Nadu Goondas Act, 19823 and was 
released from prison merely two months prior to the incident at hand.
5.	
It is the case of the prosecution that on the day of the incident, i.e. on 
14.04.2013 at around 12 noon, A2 went over to the residence of the 
deceased and asked him to accompany him to a TASMAC shop for 
consuming alcohol. The deceased and A2 left for the said purpose on 
A2’s motorcycle. PW-1 and PW-2 were at home and knew about the 
deceased’s departure with A2. However, it is alleged that they grew 
suspicious of A2’s conduct and decided to reach the said TASMAC 
shop in order to bring back the deceased. It is essential to note that, 
thereafter, PW-1 and PW-2 claim to have left their residence on a 
bicycle, reach the said shop and, from the south-entrance of the shop, 
saw the deceased person sitting and drinking with A2. At that point in 
time, A2 is said to have administered a threat to the deceased, gave 
a signal towards the north entrance of the shop/bar calling out A1 
and asking him to finish off the deceased, whereupon A1 appeared 
and started attacking the deceased indiscriminately with a weapon, 
by way of retaliation to the injuries caused to Balasubramaniam by 
the deceased, in the past. The said occurrence is described to take 
place at 12.30 p.m., having allegedly been witnessed by PW-1 and 
PW-2. The two accused persons escaped from the crime spot and 
the deceased succumbed to the multiple injuries at the spot itself.
6.	
The prosecution, thereby, charged A1 for the offence under Section 
302 IPC and A2 for the offence under Section 302 r/w 34 of the IPC. 
The charge under Section 120B of IPC was also framed against the 
two accused persons. Charges read out which were denied by the 
appellants and they claimed trial.
7.	
During the course of trial, in order to prove its case and establish 
the guilt of the accused persons, the prosecution examined PW-1 
3	
“Goondas Act”, hereinafter.


--- PAGE 5 ---
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
1365
Esakkimuthu v. State Represented by the Inspector of Police
to PW-22, marked Ex-P1 to Ex-P24, and also produced material 
objects, MO-1 to MO-8. The accused persons did not examine any 
witness or produce any document in defence.
8.	
The Trial Court, vide judgment dated 04.03.2020, convicted A1 for 
offence under Section 302 of IPC and sentenced him to undergo life 
imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in default of which to 
undergo two years’ simple imprisonment. Similarly, A2 was convicted 
for the offence under Section 302 r/w 34 of IPC and sentenced to 
undergo life imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in default 
of which to undergo two years’ simple imprisonment. The accused 
persons were held not guilty of charges under Section 120B of the 
IPC as the same remained unproven.
9.	
The basis of the conviction by the Trial Court was the eye-witness 
accounts of PW-1 and PW-2, which were considered to be natural, 
consistent, credible and unblemished, even though the other 
witnesses had turned hostile. The criminal complaint was considered 
to be proved owing to the “I know” signature of PW-3 Backiyaraj. 
It was also held that the motive for the crime has been sufficiently 
established by the prosecution. Further, it was held that even though 
there are some contradictions between the evidence of village 
administrative officers and the investigative officers about obtaining 
the confession statements from the accused, the said contradictions 
were considered to have no effect on the prosecution case. The 
motorcycle of A2, on which A2 and the deceased had travelled to 
the liquor shop, and an “aruval”, the alleged weapon of offence, 
were recovered at the instance of accused persons, based on their 
respective confessional statement.
10.	 Both the accused persons preferred an appeal before the High Court 
challenging their conviction as well as sentence.
11.	 The High Court, vide the impugned order, dismissed the appeals, 
upheld the judgment of the Trial Court and affirmed the appellants’ 
conviction and sentence.
12.	 The High Court, while ruling out any due importance to minor 
discrepancies in the depositions of PW-1 and PW-2, held that there 
are no material lapses in the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2. Therefore, 
it was concluded that involvement of A1 and A2 in the murder of the 
deceased person has been established beyond reasonable doubt. 


--- PAGE 6 ---
1366
[2025] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
13.	 Aggrieved by the impugned order, the appellants are before us.
14.	 We have heard Mr. S. Nagamuthu, learned senior counsel appearing 
for the appellants and Mr. V. Krishnamurthy, learned senior counsel 
appearing for the respondent-state. We have also thoroughly perused 
the material on record.
15.	 The counsel for the appellants has primarily submitted that it is highly 
improbable that the distance of 16 kilometers between the house of 
the deceased and the liquor shop was covered by PW-1 and PW-2 
on a bicycle within 30 minutes. Further, it has been contended that 
the conduct of PW-1 and PW-2 also does not inspire confidence 
since there was no occasion for them to have followed the deceased, 
provided that they had themselves stated A2 to be a good friend of 
the deceased.
16.	 Additionally, there were further unnatural behaviors pointed out on the 
part of the key witnesses, especially the fact that they both travelled 
back the entire distance to their home after the incident and chose 
not to give any information about the crime to a police station which 
fell on their way back. Therefore, it was submitted that the presence 
of PW-1 and PW-2 is highly doubtful, and their eye-witness accounts 
should be discarded in light of such improbability. 
17.	 It has also been submitted that the evidence of the interested 
witnesses should be subjected to careful scrutiny and accepted 
with caution, and hence, PW-1 and PW-2’s statements should not 
be relied on unless duly corroborated by other witnesses. Reliance 
has been placed on the case of Hari Obula Reddy and others v. 
State of Andhra Pradesh4 for the above argument.
18.	 On the other hand, it has been submitted by the counsel for the 
respondent that the prosecution has successfully established a clear 
motive for A1 to commit the murder in light of the ongoing enmity 
between the two parties and their families. Further, it has been argued 
that the direct and consistent testimony of the eye-witnesses, PW-1 
and PW-2, who are the son and wife of the deceased respectively, 
have been held to be credible by the Trial Court as well as the High 
Court, and should not be discarded solely on the ground of their 
relationship or the factum of them being interested witnesses.
4	
(1981) 3 SCC 675


--- PAGE 7 ---
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
1367
Esakkimuthu v. State Represented by the Inspector of Police
19.	 It has also been contended that the medical evidence, particularly 
the post-mortem report, strongly corroborates the ocular testimony 
regarding the fact that the deceased was actually taken to the 
TASMAC shop in order to consume liquor, as stated by PW-1 and 
PW-2, and the nature of injuries as described by these witnesses 
in their testimonies.
20.	 Therefore, it was submitted that the cumulative evidence, consisting 
of motive, consistent eyewitness accounts corroborated by medical 
findings, recovery of the weapon and the established sequence of 
events, paint a clear picture of the complicity of both A1 and A2 in 
the commission of the offence. A2’s role in luring the deceased to 
the location and signaling A1 is established, while A1’s role as the 
principal assailant is evident from the testimony and the nature of 
injuries.
21.	 Having noted that the verdict of conviction by the Trial Court as well 
as the High Court is heavily based on their reliance on the statements 
of PW-1 and PW-2, and the fact that most of the other independent 
witnesses have been declared hostile by the prosecution, we have 
given keen consideration to the depositions of the key prosecution 
witnesses, i.e. PW-1 and PW-2.
22.	 It is of first and foremost importance to note that it is a well-
settled principle that when the witnesses are related/interested, 
their testimonies have to be scrutinized with greater care and 
circumspection.5 In the case of Gangadhar Behera v. State of 
Orissa,6 this Court held that the testimony of such related witnesses 
should be analysed with caution for its credibility.
23.	 In the instant case, the two key witnesses are the son and wife of 
the deceased, who are very well-interested witnesses in the case. 
Therefore, their testimonies shall have to be treated with great caution, 
required to be met with a stricter standard of proof and deserve to 
be scrutinized in order to rule out any embellishment.
24.	 Thereafter, we must note that there is admittedly a distance of about 
16 kilometers between their house in Omanallur village and the liquor 
shop in Ponnakudi. The same has been stated by PW-1 himself.
5	
Mohamed Jabbar Ali & Ors. v. State of Assam, Criminal Appeal No. 1105 of 2010
6	
AIR 2002 SC 3633


--- PAGE 8 ---
1368
[2025] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
25.	 The Trial Court has brushed aside the particular argument of the 
appellant(s), about the unlikelihood of two main witnesses having 
covered this distance in half an hour by bicycle, pointing out that on 
the date of the incident, PW-l was a young boy of 17 years and that 
both PW-1 and PW-2 were anxious about the safety of the deceased, 
who was their father/husband. It was held that, therefore, there was 
every possibility of them reaching the TASMAC shop within the said 
time period.
26.	 In the like manner, the High Court agreed with the view taken by the 
Trial Court and observed that PW-l, a young boy aged 17 years, and 
in an agitated state of mind to protect his father, could have cycled 
at quite a speed to reach Ponnankudi TASMAC shop in the given 
time. Further, the High Court went ahead to presume that since 
the actual route and pathway and course of pathway had not been 
given, it is probable that PW-1 could have taken an alternate route 
which may have been less than 16 kilometers.
27.	 Firstly, it seems absurd to presume that the distance was less than 
almost 16 kilometers when PW-1 has himself deposed and agreed 
about the said distance range. Further, in our considered opinion, 
the appellants have rightly raised the contention regarding the 
improbability of PW-1 and PW-2 covering a distance of 16 kilometers 
in a matter of barely thirty minutes on a single bicycle. Even after 
affording due consideration to factors like an anxious state of mind, it 
seems highly unlikely that a boy of 17 years of age would be able to 
cover such a long distance, that too with his middle-aged mother as 
a pillion rider. It is the prosecution’s own account that the deceased 
had left the house with A2 at around 12 noon on a motorcycle, and 
that the incident took place at around 12.30 p.m. This leaves PW-1 
and PW-2 with a bare period of thirty minutes to reach the place of 
occurrence, encounter the deceased over there and subsequently 
witness the horrific incident. It seems exceedingly improbable and 
raises huge doubts about the presence of PW-1 and PW-2 at the 
crime spot. Once their presence at the scene becomes immensely 
doubtful, it renders the entire prosecution story highly unbelievable 
and lacks any substantial evidence about the appellants’ involvement 
in the crime.
28.	 As per their own testimony, PW-1 and PW-2 while being at the spot and 
actively witnessing the entire crime, do not make any attempt to save 


--- PAGE 9 ---
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
1369
Esakkimuthu v. State Represented by the Inspector of Police
the deceased person while he was allegedly being indiscriminately 
attacked by the accused persons. Even if this behavior, which was 
certainly unnatural on their part, is not weighed adversely against 
the factum of their presence, considering that different people react 
differently in moments of danger, and that PW-2 was naturally 
worried about the safety of her young son amidst the occurrence 
and, thereby, thought it best not to interfere. Yet, we are unable to 
circumscribe to the account of events which led to PW1 and PW2’s 
presence at the place of occurrence, i.e. having peddled on a bicycle 
for 16 kilometers within less than thirty minutes. This brings forth 
an inherent improbability in the prosecution story which goes to the 
root of the case altogether and cannot be overlooked.
29.	 Additionally, it also remains highly questionable as to why, after the 
incident, the two eye-witnesses travelled back the entire distance 
of 16 kilometers to their house first and went to the police station 
only subsequently thereafter, despite there being a police station en 
route from the liquor shop to their home. No satisfactory answer to 
such glaring loopholes in the prosecution story has been provided 
by the star witnesses.
30.	 Therefore, it becomes clear that even though heavy reliance has 
been placed by the Courts below on the testimonies of PW-1 and 
PW-2 in this case to bring home the guilt of the accused persons, 
their presence at the place of crime in itself is highly contentious 
and cannot be said to be proven definitely.
31.	 This improbability gains even more prominence in light of the fact 
that no other alleged eyewitness has supported the prosecution’s 
case. These alleged eyewitnesses include PW-4 and PW-5, who 
were customers in the TASMAC shop and PW-6, who was the 
manager, and have been declared hostile by the prosecution. These 
eyewitnesses, during their depositions, had stated that four or five 
persons came and attacked the deceased. The post-mortem report 
identifies 26 injuries on the body of the deceased, which in the facts 
and circumstances of the case, are unlikely to be caused by a sole 
assailant and is more probable to be a result of an attack by a group 
of individuals. The fact that the deceased was a habitual drunkard 
and a convicted criminal under the Goondas Act makes it highly 
probable that the deceased had enmities with multiple people who 
may have assaulted him and caused his death.


--- PAGE 10 ---
1370
[2025] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
32.	 The above probable explanations for the crime are being listed to 
infer that these possibilities cannot be ruled out, and that the case 
at hand is certainly not the one where it has been proven beyond 
the shadow of doubt that in all human probability, the act must have 
been done by the accused only. On the contrary, there remains an 
impressionable question mark about the presence of the accused 
persons at the spot of the crime itself. 
33.	 From the above discussion, it cannot be said that the prosecution 
has discharged its burden of establishing the guilt of the accused 
persons beyond reasonable doubt. In such circumstances, the 
accused persons have to be declared innocent and there is no 
alternative to such a conclusion.
34.	 Accordingly, the appeals are allowed. The impugned judgment dated 
10.09.2024 passed by the Madras High Court, as well as the Trial 
Court’s judgment dated 04.03.2020, are hereby, quashed and set 
aside. The appellants are acquitted of the charges alleged against 
them, and are accordingly ordered to be released forthwith unless 
required in connection with any other case.
35.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
